DIALOGUES  STANDPOINT
C
a route to recovery. The core principles of the Enlightenment 
inclined us to focus on the external: external facts, external 
actions, external objects, and external outcomes. On the 
one hand, this focus resulted in unprecedented growth 
in power, knowledge, health, and wealth for many of us. 
On the other hand, it also appears to be dooming us to 
inattention, inequality, conflict, and possibly extinction. The 
Enlightenment’s shedding of religion discarded a potent force 
that focused people’s attention on their inner lives; now might 
be a time to reconsider the value of inward attention.
THE EXTERNAL FOCUS  
OF THE ENLIGHTENMENT
Scholars often place the origins of our modern, technological 
world in the Enlightenment of the 17th and 18th centuries. 
Combining several forces that had been brewing earlier in 
Europe into a powerful movement, the Age of Enlightenment 
resulted in the Industrial Revolution and the rise of liberal 
democracy. There is consensus that Enlightenment ideals Cyberbullying, Internet addiction, job elimination, the 
destruction of democracy. Digital technology has never before 
been accused of causing so much harm; the backlash is severe 
against the contrast of tech’s early utopian promises.
Much of the criticism has placed the fault with capitalism. 
Large-scale systems of surveillance and control are 
increasingly imposed on us by tech companies. Pervasive 
advertising distracts us from our self-chosen goals while 
encouraging us to buy things we do not need. Gig-economy 
platforms reinforce inequitable class boundaries between 
service providers and consumers. In fact, an argument can 
be made that digital technology is the latest, most effective 
expression of capitalism.
Capitalism, however, has its roots in the European 
Enlightenment, and so attributing technology’s faults to 
capitalism only raises the question: What is the deeper cause?
I suggest that the deeper cause of our technological malaise 
could be an excessive focus on external outcomes; and if so, an 
inward turn as prompted by faith and spirituality could offer 
Insights
 →Enlightenment values, of which the digital arguably represents a culmination, tend to focus on external outcomes. 
 →External values have improved external life for some of the world, but they have also caused deep, widespread  
problems, and digital technologies have contributed to them. 
 →Religion and spirituality’s focus on internal values may be what we need to mitigate the undesirable outcomes of technology.Te c h nolog y  
and the Inward 
T urn of Faith
  Kentaro Toyama,  University of Michigan
@INTERACTIONSMAG
36   INTERACTIONS   JULY–AUGUST 2022were woven from several intellectual threads emphasizing 
reason and empirical knowledge, individual liberty, and the 
willingness to question existing forms of power, whether 
religious, political, or natural. These threads underlie the 
Enlightenment’s emphasis on science, personal happiness, 
representative government, and religious tolerance, which 
in turn gave way to technology, democracy, capitalism, 
and secular humanism. Today’s digital world epitomizes 
Enlightenment principles.
Of all that could be said of Enlightenment values, 
however, I focus on their external  nature. Science, for 
example, is explicit that its findings follow from objectively 
observable—i.e., external or externalized—phenomena; 
and technology is a further externalized demonstration of 
its principles. Secular humanism demands that morality 
be based on reasoning that can be considered and verified 
by others; a morality based on private visions or opaquely 
determined dictates is dogma. Modern conceptions of 
happiness, meanwhile, tend to rest on components such 
as health, wealth, social relationships, and individual 
empowerment—all external things, especially when 
contrasted with, say, the internal union with the divine. And 
a key element of democracy is transparency, the requirement 
for externally observable processes that enable all citizens to 
participate in decision making.In moral philosophy, the external focus of the 
Enlightenment led to the triumph of consequentialism—
the view that morality should be determined by that which 
leads to the best outcomes—over alternatives such as 
deontological or virtue ethics, which are more inwardly 
focused. Utilitarianism, the most common form of 
consequentialism, was espoused by Enlightenment thinkers 
such as Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill. Today, 
utilitarianism runs deep as a justification for capitalism as 
it is practiced globally, and especially with respect to digital 
technology.
It should be acknowledged that the external focus of 
Enlightenment values has brought tremendous benefits. 
Prior to 1800, life expectancy around the world was generally 
below 35 years; today, it is 72 years. In 1800, global gross 
domestic product per capita was perhaps $1,000 in today’s 
dollars; today, it is $18,000. Today, many people have access 
to the technologies of air-conditioning, anesthesia, flight, 
and the Internet—all technologies unavailable even to kings 
and queens in 1800. The Enlightenment has led to dramatic 
improvement in our external lives, perhaps exactly because of 
its external focus.
One way to understand the forces that led to our digital 
age is to consider who is hailed within it: Jeff Bezos, Steve 
Jobs, Elon Musk, Mark Zuckerberg. They command immense 
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
JULY–AUGUST 2022   INTERACTIONS   37IMAGE BY OLALA MERKEL / SHUTTERSTOCK.COMDIALOGUES  STANDPOINT
wealth and power. They are known for their technological 
feats and entrepreneurial intelligence. They seek to expand 
humanity’s external capabilities through robotics, remote 
communication, and space exploration. In effect, they are as 
much outsize representatives of Enlightenment values as they 
are giants of the tech world.
But they are also increasingly criticized for their excesses, 
both as individuals and as members of the larger digital 
society they represent. Whatever good the Enlightenment has 
brought us, it is not without its flaws.
THE INTERNAL FOCUS OF FAITH
If Enlightenment values are externally focused, and the 
culmination of those values in our digital world is curdling, 
then a potential corrective is inward examination.
I suggest such inward examination is most consistently 
championed by faith and spirituality, in at least three ways. 
First, religion often contains an explicit denunciation of 
external obsessions such as physical health, material wealth, 
professional accomplishment, or social standing. Jesus 
Christ said, “It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of 
a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of 
God” (Mark 10:25). The Koran says, “You shall not attain 
righteousness until you spend out of what you love (in the 
way of Allah)” (3:92). The most spiritual give up all worldly 
things: Saint Francis was born to a wealthy merchant 
family, but as a monk committed to a life of extreme 
poverty. The Buddha renounced his family and kingdom to 
seek enlightenment.
Second, and related, religion promotes the focusing of 
attention inward. Prayer, for example, perhaps the most 
universal of religious practices, is a complex, multilayered 
act, in that it often suggests an attempt to communicate 
with another entity, but the very absence of a corporeal 
respondent inevitably draws attention inward, through 
an inner communion 
with either oneself or the 
entity. Another example 
is religious fasting, 
among whose many 
objectives is the internal 
redirection of attention. 
Then there are practices 
such as meditation and 
contemplation, arguably 
the exemplars of inner 
focus. Eastern religions, 
such as Hinduism and 
Buddhism, consistently 
emphasize inward 
attention in their 
meditative practices, and 
the Abrahamic traditions 
have analogues such as 
Christian contemplation, 
Jewish Kabbalah, or Sufi 
mysticism. The Trappist 
monk Thomas Merton 
captured this element 
of interiority when he 
said, “Our real journey is 
interior; it is a matter of growth, deepening, and an ever greater surrender to the 
creative action of love and grace in our hearts” [1].
Third, religion and spirituality have a consistent focus on 
personal moral growth independent of external consequences. 
That faith has much to say about morality is clear, starting 
with “Thou shalt not kill.” And there is some evidence that 
religious people are more prone to prosocial behavior than the 
nonreligious, though the evidence is mixed and qualified [2]. 
But of course, morality is not the sole province of religion—
staunch atheists are certainly also capable of moral reasoning 
and action.
What is arguably unique to religion and spirituality is 
their insistence on a particular form of moral growth in which 
inner intention is weighted more than external consequences. 
Thus, in the Bible, Jesus says, “Ye have heard that it was said 
by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery: But 
I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman to lust 
after her hath committed adultery with her already in his 
heart” (Matt. 5:27–28). A similar sentiment was expressed 
by the Buddha: “Whatever an enemy may do to an enemy, 
or haters, one to another, far worse is the harm from one’s 
own wrongly directed mind” (Dhammapada 42). In other 
words, the internal state of mind should be the primary focus 
of moral attention [3]. These are dramatic repudiations of 
Enlightenment consequentialism.
THE INWARD TURN FOR TECHNOLOGY
What might an inward turn do for our digital age? Religions 
have explicit ideas about when technology should not be used. 
For example, in forms of Islam that prohibit recreational 
music or interaction between unrelated/unmarried people 
of the opposite sex, social media is frowned upon [4]. A 
study of advanced meditators suggests that, while they are 
open to using digital tools for seeking information and for 
communication, they see little value in digital assistance for 
meditation itself [5].
Our troubles with digital technology today are profound. 
Technology is accused of a growing mental health crisis, 
threatening livelihoods at large scale, and eroding democracy. 
These are existential problems, yet we seem blithely willing to 
allow the same technologies to proliferate unchecked. This is 
an internal conflict that can only be resolved with deep inward 
reflection. If we heard and heeded our inner voices, I suspect 
many of us would acknowledge that we are giving too much of 
our attention to virtual worlds. We would unplug (more often, 
anyway), and help others unplug as well.
Technology nonuse, of course, is not the only point of an 
inward turn. A more subtle goal might be what Buddhists 
call “skillful means” applied to technology. As one expert 
meditator suggested, “My use of technology for work or 
for surfing the Internet or whatever…is a place of struggle 
for bringing the [inward] practice informally there” [5]. 
Technology, interpreted in this way, presents a site for 
inner development. From a religious perspective, this 
is unremarkable, but for the nonreligious, this is a novel 
possibility: to see every digital interaction as an opportunity 
to reflect, and to use each digital moment to express the values 
one aspires to.
An inward turn thus raises a broad range of questions 
for technology users and designers, as individuals and 
societies. Could technologies be designed to prompt inner 
reflection? Can users be trained to listen better to their inner The Enlighten -
ment’s  
shedding of 
religion  
discarded a 
potent force 
that focused 
people’s  
attention on 
their inner 
lives; now 
might be a 
time to  
reconsider the 
value of in -
ward attention.
@INTERACTIONSMAG
38   INTERACTIONS   JULY–AUGUST 2022voices with respect to tech use? Are there policy levers to 
encourage inward attention? What would happen if society 
judged technology based on its enabling of reflection and 
compassion? If the founders of various faiths were alive today, 
what would they say about our digital world?
POTENTIAL OBJECTIONS
There are many possible objections to my thesis, and I 
consider three.
The first is the easiest to refute: Great harms have been 
caused in the name of religion, so what could we possibly 
gain from it? This point is often made in reference to various 
atrocities (e.g., the Crusades, Israeli apartheid, Islamic 
extremism, Burmese genocide), or by religious tribalism 
as Joyojeet Pal suggests in another Dialogue article in this 
issue (page 46). But it is not as if being nonreligious is any 
guarantee of decency (cf. Stalin, the Khmer Rouge, atheist 
Internet trolls). Wholesale rejections of religion are often 
based on a simplistic view of it, as if Florence Nightingale, 
Mahatma Gandhi, and Nelson Mandela were cut from the 
same cloth as al-Qaeda or the Ku Klux Klan. One corrective 
to such stereotyped views, especially for secularists, is 
James Fowler’s “stages of faith” framework, which proposes 
there are many ways in which people, including atheists, can 
be spiritual [6]. Throwing out all spirituality on the basis 
of fundamentalism robs us of what we might learn from a 
Mother Theresa or a Dalai Lama, or from the kinds of faith-
inspired principles that Jessica Hammer and Samantha 
Reig, as well as Alexis Hiniker and Jacob Wobbrock, 
highlight elsewhere in this section (pages 30 and 40).
A second objection comes from the religious, that this 
article’s thesis is no different from their standing criticism of 
nonbelief. My argument aligns with other calls to reconsider 
faith, but it differs in key respects. First, I do not claim 
that the adoption of any particular religion is necessarily 
the solution. What I suggest instead is that religion and 
spirituality should be respected for their profound ability 
to focus whole populations on their inner life and intrinsic 
growth. We have something to learn from that. Philosopher 
Alain de Botton [7] argues similarly, suggesting that specific 
religious practices may have value to atheists. Second, my 
argument rests firmly on inward attention as the crux for our 
digital age. While theologians might acknowledge religion’s 
interiority, rarely do they make much of it for nonbelievers. 
They instead focus on the value of a Supreme Being, 
karma, or the afterlife for enforcing goodness; or religion’s 
consolations for despair, suffering, and death; or religion as 
immunity to nihilism; or sometimes, simply, that one faith is 
T he Truth . Whatever religion’s claims about its value, what I 
am highlighting is its ability to turn attention inward.
A third objection is the secularist’s claim that humanism 
fills exactly the void I mention, and that an inward focus 
is not limited to those who are explicitly spiritual. Of 
course, religion and spirituality do not have a monopoly on 
inwardness. Committed atheists can be deeply concerned 
with their inner life and prioritize inner growth. The moral 
philosopher Peter Singer, for example, appears to be such a 
person—he thinks deeply about personal morality and tries 
to act in accordance with his values through a charitable 
foundation and substantial personal giving [8].But Singer is arguably the exception that proves the 
rule—a minor character in the huge shadow of the Musks 
and Zuckerbergs of our world. Where are today’s Gandhis 
and Nightingales? Whether because they are extremely rare, 
or because the larger society fails to notice them, we would 
probably do well with a turn away from stuff and status, to 
focus more on what is, and could be, within.
FINAL WORDS
Underlying my argument is a philosophical claim that any set 
of values that is not focused on inner growth—in reflective 
ability, in moral capacity, in self-understanding—is bound to 
an expiration date. Maximizing external goods and outcomes 
eventually meets with the limits of a finite Earth. If we could 
factor in all future external consequences into the calculus 
behind our actions, we might not need interiority, but a 
horizon out to eternity is impossible to grasp. What an inward 
turn does is to decouple, just enough, the inner cause of 
goodness from its consequences, so that we are always aiming 
for ideals whose fruits we may never see ourselves, but which 
are important nonetheless.
This view aligns with the moral philosophy of virtue ethics 
[9], which suggests the real focus of moral thought and action 
should be on inner betterment and growth in our ability to 
act well. An inward turn, as perhaps inspired by religion 
and spirituality, could counter technological excess and 
corruption.
Endnotes
1. Shannon, W.A. Silent Lamp: The Thomas Merton Story. Crossroad, 
1992.
2. Brooks, A.C. Religious faith and charitable giving. Policy Review 121 
(2003), 39.
3. I do not believe such guidance intends practitioners to ignore 
consequences, especially in the context of other religious 
injunctions that praise charitable action and discourage harm to 
others. Rather, what these passages suggest is that avoiding negative 
external outcomes is insufficient; internal thoughts and intentions 
should also be attended to, arguably as the primary focus.
4. Rifat, M.R., Chen, J., and Toyama, K. Money, God, and SMS: 
Explorations in supporting social action through a Bangladeshi 
mosque. Proc. of the 2017 SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems.  ACM, New York, 2017; https:/ /dl.acm.org/doi/
abs/10.1145/3025453.3025960
5. Markum, R.B. and Toyama, K. Digital technology, meditative 
and contemplative practices, and transcendent experiences. 
In Proc. of the 2020 SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems . ACM, New York, 2020, 1–14; https:/ /doi.
org/10.1145/3313831.3376356
6. Fowler, J.W. Stages of Faith: The Psychology of Human Development 
and the Quest for Meaning. Harper & Row, 1981.
7. de Botton, A. Religion for Atheists: A Non-believer’s Guide to the Uses 
of Religion.  Vintage, 2012.
8. Ironically, Singer espouses an extreme, externally focused 
consequentialism, but that does not contradict his internal focus. 
Inward attention may not lead everyone to the same place. Singer is 
reported to not be religious.
9. Hursthouse, R.  On Virtue Ethics. Oxford Univ. Press, 1999.
 Kentaro Toyama is W. K. Kellogg Professor of Community Information 
at the University of Michigan School of Information, a fellow of the Dalai 
Lama Center for Ethics and Transformative Values, and author of Geek 
Heresy: Rescuing Social Change from the Cult of Technology .
 →toyama@umich.edu
DOI: 10.1145/3535266  COPYRIGHT HELD BY AUTHOR. PUBLICATION RIGHTS LICENSED TO ACM. $15.00
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
JULY–AUGUST 2022   INTERACTIONS   39