Information Ecosystem Threats in Minoritized Communities:
Challenges, Open Problems and Research Directions
Shiri Dori-Hacohen
University of Connecticut & AuCoDe
Storrs, Connecticut, United States
shiridh@uconn .edu ,shiri@aucode .ioScott A. Hale
Meedan & University of Oxford
San Francisco, California, United States
scott@meedan .com ,scott .hale@oii .ox .ac .uk
ABSTRACT
Journalists, fact-checkers, academics, and community media are
overwhelmed in their attempts to support communities suffering
from gender-, race- and ethnicity-targeted information ecosystem
threats, including but not limited to misinformation, hate speech,
weaponized controversy and online-to-offline harassment. Yet, for a
plethora of reasons, minoritized groups are underserved by current
approaches to combat such threats. In this panel, we will present and
discuss the challenges and open problems facing such communities
and the researchers hoping to serve them. We will also discuss
the current state-of-the-art as well as the most promising future
directions, both within IR specifically, across Computer Science
more broadly, as well as that requiring transdisciplinary and cross-
sectoral collaborations. The panel will attract both IR practitioners
and researchers and include at least one panelist outside of IR, with
unique expertise in this space.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Security and privacy →Social aspects of security and privacy ;•
Information systems →Collaborative and social computing
systems and tools; Web searching and information discovery.
KEYWORDS
information ecosystem threats; misinformation; hate speech; abu-
sive language; community-led; minoritized communities
ACM Reference Format:
Shiri Dori-Hacohen and Scott A. Hale. 2022. Information Ecosystem Threats
in Minoritized Communities: Challenges, Open Problems and Research
Directions. In Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’22), July 11–15,
2022, Madrid, Spain. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2 pages. https://doi .org/
10 .1145/3477495 .3536327
1 PANEL DESCRIPTION
Journalists, fact-checkers, academics, and community media are
overwhelmed in their attempts to support communities suffering
from gender-, race- and ethnicity-targeted information ecosystem
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’22, July 11–15, 2022, Madrid, Spain.
©2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8732-3/22/07. . . $15.00
https://doi .org/10 .1145/3477495 .3536327threats (IETs), such as misinformation, bias, hate speech and online-
to-offline harassment [e.g., 1–3]. For example, by selectively quoting
from media and reporting content out-of-context, media manipula-
tors deliberately seek to stoke fear, drive wedges between social and
racial groups, and amplify extremist ideologies. Yet, for a plethora of
reasons, minoritized groups are underserved by current approaches
to combat such threats. For example, in the wake of COVID-19,
Asian-American and Pacific Islander (AAPI) communities are being
disproportionately targeted with such hate and misinformation [ 4–
6]; yet, such content remains largely off-the-radar of mainstream
fact-checkers and academics due to the variety of languages in-
volved, the use of ‘alternative’ platforms, and the need for cultural
context to fully understand the manipulation.
In this panel, we will present and discuss the challenges and
open problems facing such communities, as well as the researchers
and practitioners partnering with communities to build new ap-
proaches.
Topics discussed will include:
•The interlocking nature of different IETs
•Unique challenges facing minoritized communities online
•Causes of overlooking IETs in minoritized communities
•Research challenges and open problems
•Current state-of-the-art regarding IET mitigation in general,
and in minoritized communities more specifically
•Efforts currently underway regarding IETs in minoritized
communities
•Promising future research directions (both within IR specifi-
cally, and across Computer Science more broadly)
•Major challenges requiring transdisciplinary and cross-sectoral
collaborations
2 ORGANIZERS
The panel organizers bring a wealth of industry, non-profit and
academic expertise and connections to bear on the proposed theme
as well as the specific topics that will be discussed.
2.1 Institutions
AuCoDe is an AI-based startup that provides a platform technology
that detects controversies, misinformation, bias and reputation and
turns them into actionable intelligence. Meedan is a global technol-
ogy not-for-profit that builds software and programmatic initiatives
to strengthen journalism, digital literacy and accessibility of infor-
mation online and off. The Reducing Information Ecosystem
Threats (RIET) Lab at the University of Connecticut focuses on
threats to the information ecosystem online and to healthy public
discourse from an information retrieval lens, informed by insights
SIRIP Paper
 
SIGIR ’22, July 11–15, 2022, Madrid, Spain
3384from the social sciences. The Oxford Internet Institute is a mul-
tidisciplinary research and teaching department of the University
of Oxford, dedicated to the social science of the Internet.
2.2 Moderator and Panelists
Panel co-organizer and Moderator Prof. Shiri Dori-Hacohen is
the Founder & Executive Chairwoman at AuCoDe and an Assistant
Professor at the Department of Computer Science & Engineering at
the University of Connecticut. At the University of Connecticut, she
leads the Reducing Information Ecosystem Threats (RIET) Lab and
is an inaugural member of a first-of-its-kind entrepreneurial cluster,
bridging the startup and academic worlds. She has 18 years of
experience in industry, startups, and academia, including at Google
and Facebook, and has served as PI or Co-PI on over $2.7M worth of
federal funds from the US National Science Foundation. Prof. Dori-
Hacohen has been a quoted expert in media outlets including Forbes
and the Boston Globe.
Panel co-organizer and Panelist Prof. Scott A. Hale is the Di-
rector of Research at Meedan, an Associate Professor at the Oxford
Internet Institute of the University of Oxford, and a Fellow at the
Alan Turing Institute. In these roles, he works to bridge academia
and industry divides and increase equitable access to quality in-
formation online with a focus on misinformation and hate speech.
Prof. Hale is currently the PI on an NSF Convergence Accelera-
tor Phase I grant titled “FACT CHAMP - Fact-checker, Academic,
and Community Collaboration Tools: Combating Hate, Abuse, and
Misinformation with Minority-led Partnerships”.
Additional Panelists. The organizers will leverage their broad
and deep networks to attract a diverse panel from industry, non-
profit, government and academia with unique expertise in this
space, both within and outside of IR. Within IR, we will invite ex-
perts specializing in IETs, including both an industry practitioner,
such as Dr. Zeki Yalniz (Research Scientist in the misinformation
group, Facebook) or Dr. David Corney (Senior NLP Data Scientist at
Full Fact), and an academic researcher, such as Dr. Yelena Mejova
(Senior Research Scientist, ISI Foundation), Dr. Damiano Spina and
Prof. Mark Sanderson of RMIT (who collaborate extensively with
the RMIT FactLab), or Prof. Matt Lease of UT Austin. Furthermore,
we will invite 1-2 additional panelists outside of traditional IRboundaries, such as Prof. Kiran Garimella, School of Communica-
tion and Information, Rutgers; Dr. Douglas Maughan, Office Head
for the National Science Foundation (NSF) Convergence Accelera-
tor; Prof. Kathleen Hall Jamieson, Director, Annenberg Public Policy
Center and Co-founder, FactCheck.org; Gordon Pennycook, Asso-
ciate Professor, University of Regina; Prof. Michael Lynch, Board
of Trustees Distinguished Professor of Philosophy and Director of
the Humanities Institute, University of Connecticut; or Kyla Fullen-
wider, Senior Advisor for the Surgeon General of the United States.
We commit to inviting at least one panelist in each category (IR
practitioner, IR researcher, and non-IR), but in any case no more
than 5 panelists total (including the co-organizers). We strongly
believe this structure will greatly enhance the quality of the panel
and its value to the SIRIP audience.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation Convergence Accelerator (contract 49100421C0035).
Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations ex-
pressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not neces-
sarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1]Alicia L Best, Faith E Fletcher, Mika Kadono, and Rueben C Warren. 2021. Insti-
tutional distrust among African Americans and building trustworthiness in the
COVID-19 response: implications for ethical public health practice. Journal of
Health Care for the Poor and Underserved 32, 1 (2021), 90.
[2]J Jaiswal, C LoSchiavo, and DC Perlman. 2020. Disinformation, misinformation
and inequality-driven mistrust in the time of COVID-19: Lessons unlearned from
AIDS denialism. AIDS and Behavior 24, 10 (2020), 2776–2780.
[3]Jagdish Khubchandani and Yilda Macias. 2021. COVID-19 vaccination hesitancy
in Hispanics and African-Americans: A review and recommendations for practice.
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity-health 15 (2021), 100277.
[4]Jae Yeon Kim and Aniket Kesari. 2021. Misinformation and Hate Speech: The Case
of Anti-Asian Hate Speech During the COVID-19 Pandemic. Journal of Online
Trust and Safety 1, 1 (2021).
[5]Mingqi Li, Song Liao, Ebuka Okpala, Max Tong, Matthew Costello, Long Cheng,
Hongxin Hu, and Feng Luo. 2021. COVID-HateBERT: A pre-trained language
model for COVID-19 related hate speech detection. In 2021 20th IEEE International
Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA). IEEE, 233–238.
[6]Bertie Vidgen, Scott Hale, Ella Guest, Helen Margetts, David Broniatowski, Zeerak
Waseem, Austin Botelho, Matthew Hall, and Rebekah Tromble. 2020. Detecting
East Asian prejudice on social media. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on
Online Abuse and Harms . Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 162–
172. https://doi .org/10 .18653/v1/2020 .alw-1 .19
SIRIP Paper
 
SIGIR ’22, July 11–15, 2022, Madrid, Spain
3385