Distributed Enterprise Search using Software Agents
(Demonstration)
Erwin Gunadi, Michael Meder, Till Plumbaum, Christian Scheel, Frank Hopfgartner
and Sahin Albayrak
Technische Universität Berlin
10587 Berlin, Germany
{ﬁrstname.lastname}@dai-labor.de
ABSTRACT
In this paper we introduce a distributed information re-
trieval system using agent-based technology. In this multi-
agent system, each agent has its own specic task and can
be used to handle a specic document repository. The sys-
tem is designed to automatically comply with access restric-
tion rules that are normally enforced in companies. It is
used in the administration oces of the German capital city
Berlin where it serves as a testbed for further research on
aggregated search in an enterprise environment with roughly
50,000 employees.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.4 [ Systems and Software ]: Distributed Systems
Keywords
distributed information retrieval; enterprise; software agents
1. INTRODUCTION
Enterprise environments face scattered and unstructured
information, as data is created in dierent formats across dif-
ferent places [7]. This makes searching in such environment
challenging, since established search algorithms and tech-
niques cannot easily be transferred to an enterprise scenario
[7, 8, 10]. Hence, research on the development of appropri-
ate desktop and enterprise systems is required. Hawking [2,
3] and Mukherjee et al. [7] identify various challenges that
arise from such environments: First of all, heterogeneous
document types are created, which are stored in multiple
document repositories. Moreover, dierent access restric-
tions need to be considered, i.e., not everyone is allowed to
access all data in an enterprise. While some data is avail-
able for every employee (e.g., company's web pages), more
sensitive data (e.g., blueprints of top secret prototypes, etc.)
might be accessible by a minority only. Moreover, the sensi-
tive nature of data available in an enterprise raises specic
demands on data security [2]. In particular, using central-
ized indices can be seen as a major security risk for enterprise
search systems.
Appears in: Alessio Lomuscio, Paul Scerri, Ana Bazzan,
and Michael Huhns (eds.), Proceedings of the 13th Inter-
national Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems (AAMAS 2014), May 5-9, 2014, Paris, France.
Copyright c2014, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems (www.ifaamas.org). All rights reserved.In this demo paper, we introduce an enterprise search sys-
tem with distributed indices which addresses the data accu-
mulation task of enterprise search systems. The framework
incorporates the idea of data mining agents, a technique
which has been successfully employed to create data ware-
houses [6]. We use autonomous agents for every task in
the data accumulation and indexing activity, i.e., each agent
provides core services that cover a specic part in the back-
end. Complex tasks such as crawling and indexing a le
server is achieved by combining the corresponding agents,
i.e., the autonomous agents form a community to provide
a joint service in creating search engine capabilities. When
multiple data repositories (collections) need to be indexed
we use these agent communities to build a distributed search
engine. Search request are handled by broker agents that
verify users' identity and their access rights using the en-
terprise's directory access constraints that are dened using
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP).
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we re-
view state-of-the-art research related to enterprise search.
Section 3 provides an overview of our system. Section 4
concludes this paper.
2. RELATED WORK
Existing enterprise search systems can be classied into
two categories: (1) systems that create one centralized index
and (2) systems that create many distributed independent
indices. A centralized index can be used when it is possi-
ble to crawl all of the relevant data sources into a single
index structure. However, since in most cases information is
stored at dierent locations and due to physical constraints
such as geographical location, low bandwidth connections
and administration restrictions, gathering data in one search
index is not always feasible [3]. Another important feature
of enterprise search system is that it has to be able to handle
security and rights management issues [7, 2].
We address the issue of building distributed independent
indices by applying software agents. Jennings et al. [5] pro-
vide a detailed comparison of the agent and other software
engineering paradigms. One of the advantages of this con-
cept is that we can model each agent to handle dierent
unique tasks. A similar approach has been introduced by
Zhou et al. [11], who, however, relies on ontologies to model
user access. Our system is more exible since its user access
is managed automatically by exploiting the existing access
rights saved in LDAP.
Note that currently, there are already some commercial
enterprise search products available that provide distributed
1623search to some extent. It remains unclear though whether
such proprietary o-the-shelf systems really comply with
strict information privacy rules. Therefore, government agen-
cies e.g., in Germany are advised to rely on alternative sys-
tems that allow them to maintain control over their data.
Addressing this issue, our system is currently trialed in the
administration oces of the city of Berlin, allowing us to
study open research challenges in the eld using real users
in real context.
3. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
In order to accumulate data from distributed sources, we
rely on autonomous software agents that can be combined
to build joint services. We propose to provide autonomous
agents for every task in the data accumulation and indexing
activity, i.e., each agent provides a core service that cov-
ers a specic part in the back-end. Example agents include
crawling agents based on Nutch1or search agents based on
Solr2. The combination of these agents forms a distributed
search architecture that individually crawls and indexes all
of the available repositories and create multiple independent
search verticals. Search requests are received by a broker
agent via REST-APIs. When user authorization is required
the broker agent communicates with the LDAP server to
verify user account and will fetch user's access permissions
after successful login. It is used to query available search
agents. Each search agent then limits the found documents
according to the user's permission. An example of the com-
bination of these agents is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Broker Agent delegates search requests to
dierent search agents
For organization and implementation of these agents and
their communication, we use the JIAC (Java-based Intel-
ligent Agent Componentware) framework [4]. JIAC is a
software-agent framework that has been optimized for large-
scale applications and services. It gives us a tool to create
specialized agents and to build a multi-agent system. Fur-
ther, JIAC supports encrypted communication and user au-
thorization.
1http://nutch.apache.org/
2https://lucene.apache.org/solr/4. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this demo, we introduce a document crawling and in-
dexing system which can be applied in a desktop and enter-
prise search scenario. As we have outlined, the typical IT
infrastructure of enterprise intranets requires exible data
aggregation methods that are able to handle distributed
sources. We propose the use of autonomous software agents
which communicate via a common agent framework. Advan-
tages of this approach are the agent's exibility in handling
distributed infrastructures as well as the easy possibility to
expand the framework's services further, i.e., by combining
existing agents or by adding new software agents.
The introduced approach is currently used as the data ag-
gregation method of a Desktop and Enterprise search system
of the administration of Berlin with roughly 50,000 employ-
ees, thus assisting a large user base in their professional in-
formation gathering task. As future work, we aim to study
novel approaches for federated search [1, 9] and analyze in-
teraction logs of these users to further study open research
questions, e.g., on content personalization and aggregated
result ranking. A demo of the system can be accessed on
http://pia-demo.dai-labor.de/
Acknowledgement
We acknowledge the support of Steven Winter, Jens Mein-
ers, Marcus Adler and Arif Oksal. The system has been
developed under the umbrella of IDBB, a research collabo-
ration between DAI-Labor and ITDZ Berlin.
5. REFERENCES
[1] J. Callan. Distributed information retrieval. In
Advances in Information Retrieval , pages 127{150.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000.
[2] D. Hawking. Challenges in enterprise search.
Proceedings of the 15th Australasian database
conference - Volume 27 , 2004.
[3] D. Hawking. Enterprise Search. In R. Baeza-Yates and
B. Ribeiro-Neto, editors, Modern Information
Retrieval, pages 641{684. Addison-Wesley, 2010.
[4] B. Hirsch, T. Konnerth, and A. Heler. Merging
Agents and Services - the JIAC Agent Platform. In
Multi-Agent Programming: Languages, Tools and
Applications , pages 159{185. Springer, 2009.
[5] N. R. Jennings and M. Wooldridge. Agent-oriented
software engineering. Articial Intelligence,
117:277{296, 2000.
[6] M. Klusch, S. Lodi, and G. Moro. Agent-Based
Distributed Data Mining: The KDEC Scheme. In
AgentLink, pages 104{122, 2003.
[7] R. Mukherjee and J. Mao. Enterprise search: Tough
stu. Queue, 2(2):36{46, 4 2004.
[8] J. Peng, C. Macdonald, B. He, and I. Ounis. A study
of selective collection enrichment for enterprise search.
InCIKM, pages 1999{2002, 2009.
[9] M. Shokouhi and L. Si. Federated Search. Foundations
and Trends in Information Retrieval , 5(1):1{102, 2011.
[10] W. Zheng, H. Fang, C. Yao, and M. Wang. Search
result diversication for enterprise data. CIKM, pages
1901{1904, 2011.
[11] L. Zhou. Multi-agent based distributed secure
information retrieval. In CMC'10 , pages 76{79, 2010.
1624