Technology and Student Services Expo:   
Creating a Collaborative “one-stop-shop” for Incoming 
Students and Parents during Freshman Orientation 
Jason Wagner 
University of Rochester 
Lower Hoyt Hall 
Rochester, NY 14627 
1 585-275-0517 
jason.wagner@rochester.edu  
    
ABSTRACT 
 
The University of Rochester has developed a dynamic approach to 
marketing our IT services for incoming students and their 
families.  The “Technology and Student Services Expo” was 
created with partners across academic and administrative 
departments, student services organizations and the University 
community.  University IT remains the driving force behind the Expo, as we seek to welcome ne w students and their families to 
the University while offering them a “one-stop-shop” to interact 
with all the services an incomi ng student may need to begin a 
successful academic career at the University. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors  
K.6.1 / Training 
General Terms  
Management, Human Factors 
Keywords 
Marketing, Orientation, Management, Help Desk, ResNet 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The University of Rochester, located in Rochester, New York, is a 
private, tier-one research unive rsity with 5066 undergraduate and 
3065 graduate students. The University is comprised of a teaching 
hospital and six academic divisions located across three main 
campuses. The primary academic divisions responsible for 
undergraduate instruction, with nearly 4500 undergraduates, are 
the schools of Arts & Sciences, and the Hajim School of  
Engineering and Applied Sciences, which combined are most 
commonly known as “The College.”  Our campus IT 
organization, “University IT”, is  the central IT organization for 
the university across our academic units. Until 2004, freshman orientation occurred three times each 
summer over a series of three-day sessions.  This process was 
expensive and time intensive fo r faculty and staff across the 
University.  This method also re quired that students who chose to 
attend the first or second session return to Rochester to move-in. 
This process was especially time consuming for IT staff, as they 
had to conduct three separate tec hnology fairs, ResNet orientation, 
and more. 
University IT, in partnership with our orientation office, Dean’s 
Office, and other campus leaders wanted to develop a new 
approach to orientation.  Orient ation now occurs just once each 
summer; freshman move-in occurs at the same time, in one 
complete seamless process.  The technology and student services 
expo was created to bring all the services that a new student may 
need under one roof, in one place, at one time.  Thus the “Technology and Student Serv ices Expo” was created. 
2. WHAT IS THE EXPO 
Students and their families wa lk through our fieldhouse which 
becomes temporarily transformed into a trade-show layout, with a 
series of exhibits and services unde r one roof.  This is contrasted 
with the abandoned approach of sending new students across campus from office to office armed only with maps and questions 
that go unanswered. 
University IT uses the Expo to market our services, communicate 
security and policy information,  and answer ResNet, Blackboard 
or general help desk questions.  Student employees may be 
recruited and a temporary full service retail location for our 
computer sales group is established.  A free University IT 
drawstring backpack comes pre-loaded with a t-shirt and reference 
materials. 
Partnerships with departme nts, vendors and student life 
organizations are critical to attr act students to the “one-stop shop” 
Expo event.  Participants include River Campus Libraries, the 
Office of Communications, Parent  Programs Office, University 
Security Services, the ID Office , Student Government, the Career 
Center, the Interfaith Chapel, Di ning Services, Alumni Relations, 
Athletics, Student Ac tivities Office, Parki ng, Barnes and Noble 
Bookstore, The Campus Times news paper, Time Warner Cable, 
local banks, Apple, Dell, cellula r vendors and local businesses. 
The Expo has been very successful and allows University IT to establish an immediate and pos itive relationship with incoming 
students and their parents.  
Permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
SIGUCCS’10 , October 24–27, 2010, Norfolk, Virginia, USA. 
Copyright 2010 ACM  978-1- 4503-0003-2/10/ 10...$10.00. 
97Figure 1: Expo Layout 
The ID Office serves as the critical partner to attract students to 
the Expo.  A student’s ID card is their gateway to everything from 
eating on campus to accessing a dormitory.  University IT works 
carefully with the ID Office to move their operations into a large 
room one level above the fieldh ouse.  All incoming students are 
directed to this room where thei r photo is taken and their ID is 
created.  The students and parents are then directed to the adjacent 
fieldhouse where they enter the layout pictured in Figure 1. 
3. UNIVERSITY IT BOOTH 
The University IT booth is at the en trance of the Expo.  This is the 
first opportunity for University IT  to interact with students and 
parents.  We post greeters at the entrance who direct students into 
the IT Booth.  Before 2010, stude nts would be directed to swipe 
their newly minted ID card at computer kiosks as they walk in.  The kiosks are linked to our stude nt information system database 
via LDAP.  The swipe serves tw o purposes.  First, it tells the 
student that their ID is functional, by linking their ID card to the 
LDAP database.  The information that is retrieved is specific to 
the student, including their Univ ersity email address, campus 
mailing address or “CPU”, and academic advisor.  We are careful 
to avoid displaying any personally identifying information (PII).  
The student then printed this information on a specially designed 
piece of perforated card stock.  This results in a set of six 
“business cards” that the student can give to Mom and Dad.  The 
cards include contact information about how to reach the IT Help 
Desk, Computer Sales, and th e URL for the student portal. 
In an effort to cut back on prin ting and improve sustainability, the 
printout is now optional.  University IT will e-mail the student the 
same information printed on the card a few days before coming to 
campus.  This way, the information can be shared with family and 
friends electronically. 
The information card has historically been very popular with 
parents who quickly tear at the pe rforations as their students make 
their way through the IT Booth.  Our transformation to an electronic e-mailed card will be evaluated after Expo 2010. 
 
  
 
Back 
. 
 
   
 
     
 
      
 
Figure 2: Student Information sheet front 
 
98After the swipe stations, the students walk a few feet away where 
they are provided with a free drawstring backpack, branded with 
the URL for the student portal.  The bag is pre-loaded with help 
desk information, FAQ’s, and other marketing information from 
University IT. 
Professional staff stand ready at nearby tables offering insights, 
information and answers for questions large and small.  The 
following IT units are represented at the Expo:  ResNet, Help 
Desk, Security and Policy, Classr oom Technology (Student Labs), 
Computer Sales and Service, Networking and Communications. 
In 2010 we will also offer computer kiosks where students can enroll their wireless phones in Al ertUR, our emergency alerting 
and notification system. 
The University IT Computer Sales and Service organization 
operates a fully equipped technology  store at the Expo.  Incoming 
students can pickup their pre-ordered computer and printer bundle, buy software or hardware and other dorm necessities. 
4. LOCATION, LOCATION, LOCATION 
The fieldhouse is ideally suited to host this event. While it is not 
climate controlled, which can be a challenge in August, it is the 
only on-campus location where all of our partners can fit under 
one roof.  Years ago, new studen ts would arrive on campus, wait 
in a massive line at each office they needed to visit and navigate the campus with maps from place to place.  We have centralized 
this using a trade show format, with all of the offices students 
need in one place.  Each bo oth brings value to the Expo 
experience. 
The cellular vendors are very popular with international students.  
Many of these students have recent ly arrived in this country and 
the Expo serves as their opportuni ty to obtain a wireless device 
for use in the United States. 
The Student Activities Office and Student Government booth 
offers students ways to be involve d in campus life and leadership.  
Information is provided about clubs  and special interest groups as 
well as ways to become involved with student government. University Security focuses on campus safety and communication.  
This is especially the case for students who may need to contact 
Security from their wireless phone.  While we have an extensive network of public “blue light phones” which ring directly to 
security, there are virtually no  phones installed in dormitories 
anymore. 
The interfaith chapel offers info rmation on religious services and 
spiritual life on campus. Dining services brings free drinks  and critical information about 
dining plans and locations to  eat on and near campus. 
The parking office is on hand to help new students learn about 
where and how to park their vehicles while on campus.  Most 
students who bring a car have already registered for a permit by 
this time. 
Time-Warner cable signs students up for cable TV in the 
residence halls, offering inform ation on plans and pricing. 
Athletics and Recreation brings si gn up information for Intramural 
sports, fitness centers and more. 
The Career Center offers advice for students seeking employment, 
including information on the campus wide job fair held a few days 
after the Expo. Local vendors from the nearby Mt. Hope Business Association are 
on hand to let students know what goods and services are 
available within walking distance from campus. 
The Expo represents a unique opport unity for partners of all sorts 
to interact with students and parents in an environment where 
more than 80% of the incoming class attends. 
River Campus Libraries are closely aligned with University IT as 
strategic partners.  In 2009 the River Campus Libraries began a 
marketing campaign to highlight the specific subject area of 
expertise of their Librarians.  The campaign was launched at expo 
and was both very popular and highly effective. 
 
Figure 3 League of Librarians, front 
 
The reverse side of the cards incl udes contact inform ation, subject 
area expertise, special super pow ers, “secret weapons” such as 
Facebook and Twitter and “Vulne rabilities” (chocolate). 
The entire series can be seen here:  http://www.flickr.com/phot os/carlsonlibrary/sets/7215762200650
3335/ The League of Librarians series was collected by University staff 
and students alike.  It has laun ched a poster series within the 
libraries as well.  In the Russian  studies section, a poster of the 
related subject matter librarian’s card is on display. 
 
After the success of this trading card concept, other groups plan to 
use the Expo as the launching  pad for new initiatives. 
 
995. NO ONE PLANS TO FAIL… 
Planning for the next Expo begins a few weeks after the current 
year wraps up.  An after action review is conducted with Expo 
team members to discuss what went well and what could be 
improved for the next year. 
The Expo uses a project manager and a shadow to ensure 
continuity of leadership.  The sh adow attends meetings with the 
current project manage r and acts as the deputy during the Expo 
planning process. 
Regular meetings are held with the IT leadership team to ensure 
alignment with strategic goals and University wide initiatives.  
This includes topics such as  branding, upcoming communication 
campaigns and similar initiatives. 
A working group of staff members who plan the activities within 
the IT booth are led by the project manager.  Staff members are 
tasked with the following functions: 
Layout:  The layout changes from year to year based on the 
feedback we receive.  The edges of the fieldhouse are covered by 
pipe and drape material which allo ws the staff a semi-private spot, 
away from the hubbub of the Expo to take a break or have lunch. 
T-shirt and Backpack design (new each year) 
Networking and Communications (NC):  NC prepares the Student 
Resource Guide, an electronic and printed directory provided to 
each dorm room with instructions about how to get online, where 
to eat, how to contact your RA and much more.  NC also provides 
the data and telecom cabling needed to operate the Expo. 
Food:  A pizza lunch is provided for all IT Staff.  Be sure not to 
forget the plates, napkins, cups and hand sanitizer. Volunteer Coordinator:  During the expo approximately 25 
professional IT staff members are on hand.  Volunteers are 
scheduled for short Expo shifts during their day, so the Expo is not an all-day commitment.  Staff members enjoy participating in 
the Expo, meeting students and pare nts; volunteers are not hard to 
come by for this event. 
Photo and Video:  A volunteer is designated to take pictures and 
video for use in a slide show and movie at the next Expo.  A rear 
projection screen and high-resoluti on projector are used to show 
images from past Expos and other campus life. 
Setup and Tear-Down:  The Expo is setup over a period of two 
days, with University Security Services providing a 24 hour on 
site presence to protect the installed technology and vendor 
displays.  Tear down is accomplished within a few hours after the event concludes.  Many of the Expo specific items are stored in an 
adjacent storage room to minimize travel. 
6. CONCLUSION 
Based on parent and student feedback , the Expo is here to stay.  
Parents working in IT at other colleges and universities who were 
attending to drop off their students at the University of Rochester 
have raved about the Expo experien ce.  We strive to improve the 
design, layout and planning each year to continue on a course of 
perpetual positive improvement.  IT Staff members enjoy meeting 
with students and parents which makes the Expo a “fun” event.  
Volunteers are easy to find!  The Expo approach is superior to 
decentralized orientation designs of the past.  A one day, one stop 
shop is both cost effective and re levant for students and parents 
alike. 
  
 
100