29Will Online Digital Footprints Reveal Your Relationship Status? An
Empirical Study of Social Applications for Sexual-Minority Men
JIANGTAO WANG, Lancaster University, United Kingdom
JUNYI MA, Peking University, China
YASHA WANG∗,Peking University, China
NING WANG, Peking University, China
LEYE WANG, Peking University, China
DAQING ZHANG, Peking University, China
FENG WANG, Peking University, China
QIN LV, University of Colorado Boulder, USA
With the increasing social acceptance and openness, more and more sexual-minority men (SMM) have succeeded in creating
and sustaining steady relationships in recent years. Maintaining steady relationships is beneficial to the wellbeing of SMM
both mentally and physically. However, the relationship maintaining for them is also challenging due to the much less
supports compared to the heterosexual couples, so that it is important to identify those SMM in steady relationship and
provide corresponding personalized assistance. Furthermore, knowing SMM’s relationship and the correlations with other
visible features is also beneficial for optimizing the social applications’ functionalities in terms of privacy preserving and
friends recommendation. With the prevalence of SMM-oriented social apps (called SMMSA for short), this paper investigates
the relationship status of SMM from a new perspective, that is, by introducing the SMM’s online digital footprints left on
SMMSA (e.g., presented profile, social interactions, expressions, sentiment, and mobility trajectories). Specifically, using a
filtered dataset containing 2,359 active SMMSA users with their self-reported relationship status and publicly available app
usage data, we explore the correlations between SMM’s relationship status and their online digital footprints on SMMSA and
present a set of interesting findings. Moreover, we demonstrate that by utilizing such correlations, it has the potential to
construct machine-learning-based models for relationship status inference. Finally, we elaborate on the implications of our
findings from the perspective of better understanding the SMM community and improving their social welfare.
CCS Concepts: •Information systems →Data mining ;•Human-centered computing →User models ;•
Social and professional topics →Relationship Status.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Sexual-minority men, relationship status, online digital footprints.
∗This is the corresponding author
Authors’ addresses: Jiangtao Wang, Lancaster University, lancaster, United Kingdom, jiangtao.wang@lancaster.ac.uk; Junyi Ma, Peking
University, Beijing, China, majunyi@pku.edu.cn; Yasha Wang, Peking University, Beijing, China, wangyasha@pku.edu.cn; Ning Wang, Peking
University, Beijing, China, 1500012633@pku.edu.cn; Leye Wang, Peking University, Beijing, China, leyewang@pku.edu.cn; Daqing Zhang,
Peking University, Beijing, China, dqzhang@sei.pku.edu.cn; Feng Wang, Peking University, Beijing, China, wangfeng2013@pku.edu.cn; Qin
Lv, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, USA, qin.lv@colorado.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first
page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
2474-9567/2020/3-ART29 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3380978
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.29:2 •Wang et al.
ACM Reference Format:
Jiangtao Wang, Junyi Ma, Yasha Wang, Ning Wang, Leye Wang, Daqing Zhang, Feng Wang, and Qin Lv. 2020. Will Online
Digital Footprints Reveal Your Relationship Status? An Empirical Study of Social Applications for Sexual-Minority Men. Proc.
ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 4, 1, Article 29 (March 2020), 23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3380978
1 INTRODUCTION
Sexual-minority men (SMM) is referred to the group of gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men.
The community of SMM suffer from discriminations and social stigma because of their homosexual identities,
and their relationships have been a source of controversy [ 19] [18]. In recent decades, despite the continuous
prejudice and obstacles in some cultures, the overall societal attitudes towards SMM’s relationship worldwide
have been becoming more and more tolerant. One direct evidence is that an increasing number of countries or
regions recognize same-sex marriage in law [ 19]. In some other cultures, although the legal marriage has not
been legalized yet, we have witnessed the increasing openness. For example, increasing numbers of people in
China now regard the choice of sexual orientation as individual freedom and basic human right.
As a result of the increasing acceptance and tolerance in the society, more and more SMM have succeeded in
creating and sustaining steady relationships [ 3].Maintaining the steady relationships is beneficial to the wellbeing
of SMM both mentally and physically, which was indicated by a number of recent studies [ 1,6,21,35,55,58]. For
example, authors in [ 58] revealed that condomless anal sex, which increases the risk of HIV infection, was less
frequent for SMM who were in steady relationships. Studies such as [ 1,6,21,35] suggested that having steady
partners play an important role in mitigating HIV transmission. Moreover, through a health interview survey
in California, the authors of [ 55] found that being in a steady relationship was associated with lower levels of
psychological distress for SMM.
Despite the above advantages of the relationships, maintaining it in a harmonious condition is very challenging
for SMM due to the following reasons. First, there will be extremely high pressure when one of the partners gets
into tough situations (e.g., serious illness or economic dilemma). In similar situations, the heterosexual partners
usually get many external supports (e.g., daily life care or financial assistance) from both the society and their
families/relatives. However, many studies revealed that such support is extremely inadequate for SMM [ 12]. For
example, when one gay man suffers from certain serious illness, his partner not only has to care for a dying
partner through a long illness, but also experiences the hopelessness without the equal supports available to
heterosexual ones [ 15]. Second, there are some conflicts which become big threats to the relationship maintenance
for SMM. One of the biggest conflicts is related to the disclosure of the relationships. When the partners disagree
about the extent to which they should disclose their relationship, problems can ensue and the resolution of such
conflicts may be central to keeping successful relationship over time [ 23]. The negotiation of household task
divisions is another more challenging issue for SMM than heterosexual partners, and the failures of negotiation
often lead to the conflict and crisis in keeping the relationships [30].
Therefore, it is of vital importance of providing relevant assistance to SMM in steady relationships, which
will eventually help them maintain their relationships in a good condition. For example, we can provide the
information (e.g., the address and the time of services) of some related social organizations or therapists. Also, we
can forward information about relevant workshops or some chicken-soup articles on how to maintain harmonious
relationships. One straightforward way is that we provide such assisted information to all SMM, and those who
need it will see it. However, this information broadcasting way has shortcomings. First, it will bring intrusiveness
and discomfort to others who do not really need it. For example, SMM not in the relationships may be more
interested to receive information about how to find the perfect partners rather than those saying how to take
care of the adopted kids in the gay family. Second, the content of some information may not be inappropriate
for certain populations. For example, articles about sex relationships management should not be delivered to
all SMM. Thus, in order to provide more precise and personalized assistance in relationship maintaining and
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.Will Online Digital Footprints Reveal Your Relationship Status? An Empirical Study of Social Applications for ... •29:3
management, it is significantly important to identify those who are in steady relationships. However, as the
community of SMM is rather hidden, the identification is very difficult.
In additional to the benefit in providing the personalized assistance, knowing SMM’s relationship and its
correlations with other features that people left on the application is also beneficial for the service providers of
SMMSA in optimizing the apps’ functionalities. First, it provides a privacy alert and guidance for the interface
design. To protect the users’ privacy, SMMSA usually allow users to hide their relationship status shown on
the apps. However, our findings in this paper revealed a potential risk , that is, an adversary may infer users’
relationship status with other publicly visible features on the app. Thus, this study also provides guidance for the
service provider to design better privacy preserving mechanisms (e.g., suggesting users to hide other correlated
information if they do not want to disclose their relationship status). Second, identifying the status can help
optimize the friend recommendation, which is one of the key functionalities in the social apps. For example, the
app can recommend more friends with common interests to those in steady relationships, while recommending
more friends with appropriate dating profiles (e.g., matched sex role and age) to those not in steady relationships.
Given the popularity of smartphones and the mobile Internet, a large number of SMM-oriented mobile social
apps (we call them SMMSA for short) have emerged in recent years (e.g., Grindr1, Blued2and Jack’d3), which
provide SMM with opportunities to find nearby homosexual friends. These apps have a large number of active
users, through which many SMM make friends and update postings [ 7,42,57]. For example, Blued, the most
popular SMMSA in China, claimed to have more than 40 million users in 2018 [ 11]. One direct way is that we can
use users’ self-reported relationship status in these apps. However, some apps may not design such a field, or
even if with it, many people do not fill this field when they start to use the apps. For example, in the dataset of
our study, only 2000+ out of 7000+ users report this attribute.
The rising use of these apps resulted in a proliferation of multi-modality data for the SMM community (e.g.,
profiles, postings, social relationships and mobility), which are referred to as online digital footprints in the
paper. These digital footprints usually reflect the pattern of online behavior, which is associated with people’s
physical attributes [ 2,5]. With such intuition in mind, it may be possible that we can investigate the correlations
between their digital footprints and relationship status, and further use such correlations to infer the SMMSA
users’ relationship status. Thus, we raise a novel research question in this paper: are the online digital footprints
of SMMSA users correlated with their relationship status? If the answer is yes, then what are the significantly
correlated features? Can we use these features to identify SMM in steady relationship status? To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to investigate this research question.
In this work, using a filtered dataset regarding a popular SMMSA in China (with 2,359 active users in a
mid-sized city), we characterize users’ profiles and online behavior from different aspects of digital footprints,
and study their correlations with users’ relationship status. This dataset makes our study feasible as it contains
both users’ self-reported relationship status (i.e., being in a steady relationship or not) and other types of data
(e.g., profiles, friendship list, postings, check-in time and locations, and so on). Based on this dataset and extracted
variables, we conduct an extensive analysis to explore how the online digital footprints may correlate with
relationship status and present a set of interesting findings in terms of presented profiles, social interactions,
expressions & sentiment, and spatial-temporal patterns. Besides these findings regarding individual variables,
we also demonstrate that by exploiting such correlations, we can extract combinations of features and adopt
machine-learning methods to infer SMM’s relationship status accurately.
The major contributions of our study consist of the following:
1https://www.grindr.com/about/
2https://www.blued.com/intl/
3http://www.jackd.mobi/
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.29:4 •Wang et al.
(1) To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to investigate SMM’s relationship status from the perspective
of SMM-oriented social apps. We exploit a dataset from a popular SMMSA in China to characterize users’ features
from different aspects of online digital footprints and explore its correlations with users’ relationship status.
(2) We conduct an extensive study of inter-variable correlations and establish a set of interesting findings
regarding how the digital footprints left on social apps correlate with their relationship status. Specifically, we
found that users with different relationship status behave differently in presented profiles, social interactions,
expressions, sentiment, and spatial-temporal patterns.
(3) We extract a set of features based on the findings and demonstrate the feasibility of constructing a machine-
learning model to accurately infer SMM’s relationship status (i.e., whether someone is in a steady relationship or
not). We also present the implications of our findings and proposed model from different perspectives.
2 RELATED WORK
There are several terms in the state-of-the-art literatures having the same meaning with SMM, such as homosexual
men, men who have sex with men (MSM), gay men, and so forth. In this paper, we use the term SMM consistently
when summarizing the related works to avoid the confusion. The related studies can be roughly divided into the
following categories.
Relationship status for SMM. Several research works have investigated the relationship status of SMM, and
most of them studied its correlation with SMM’s offline behaviors, especially for physical and mental health.
Many literatures such as [ 1,6,21,35] revealed that sustaining steady relationships plays an important role in
mitigating HIV transmission.The authors of [ 58] concluded that condomless anal sex was more common for men
who were not in a steady relationship. Moreover, some other studies [ 20,55] explored how the relationship status
affects mental health. For example, from the California Health Interview Survey, the authors of [ 55] found that
having a steady partner was associated with lower levels of psychological distress for individuals in same-sex
relationships. Similarly, research in [ 20] even pointed out that discriminatory environments and bans on same-sex
marriage are detrimental to mental health, and suggested that legalizing same-sex marriage contributes to better
health for them. Although the above-mentioned literatures also investigate SMM’s relationship status, they
mainly focus on SMM’s offline behaviors or conditions rather than online behaviors on social apps.
Self-presentation in SMMSA and disclosure. These SMMSAs have become particularly popular among
SMM and raised a range of questions about self-presentation, visibility to others, and impression formation
[25]. The authors in [ 8] explored how people manage potentially stigmatized identities in using these apps
and what types of information they use to self-present in the absence of a detailed profile. The authors in [ 47]
investigated the effects of intimate self-disclosure and sexting via private messaging on internalized homophobia
and loneliness. The results suggested that the uses of SMMSA was negatively associated with loneliness. The
study in [ 10] indicated that co-situation affects how and whether Grindr users and their behaviors are visible to
others. The study in [ 16] examined how gay men present themselves across different cultures, and the results
demonstrate that Chinese gay men are less likely to show their faces than American gay men, because of the
stronger stigma of homosexuality in China. The authors in [ 24] argued that sexual health-related language in
social apps can be used as a sensor to provide insights into discourse among particular communities.
App usage motivation. SMM may use these apps for different purposes, and several recent literatures
studied usage motivation. Through the uses and gratifications approach, the authors of [ 22] discussed the needs
and motivations that bring SMM online to social apps, how they manage multiple identities online, and the
resulting gratifications of their online activities. Through a case study involving more than 500 participants, the
investigation in [ 51] revealed six usage motivations of SMM’s mobile dating apps: social inclusion, sex, friendship,
entertainment, romantic relationships, and location-based search. From the perspective of HCI design, the authors
of [26] studied how to optimize SMM dating apps’ functionality to meet the requirements of users with different
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.Will Online Digital Footprints Reveal Your Relationship Status? An Empirical Study of Social Applications for ... •29:5
usage motivations. Although people always think that the ultimate goal of SMMSA is to enable face-to-face
contact, the authors of [ 48] challenged this assumption and argued that these apps have succeeded not because
they extended social relationships, but because they established amateur porn platforms. There is also a group of
literatures that analysed the relationship between the usage of SMMSA and risk behaviors for HIV infection. For
example, the study in [ 17] analysed the associations of unprotected anal sex with partners found via Grindr in
young SMM in Los Angeles, and found that the average number of partners varied according to sexual behaviors,
especially whether partners were found on apps. The authors of [ 56] assessed risk behaviors of those using
SMMSA, and reported that partners found via the SMMSA were more likely to have unprotected anal sex. The
authors in [ 31] and [ 7] found that SMMSA users have a higher average number of sex partners and more frequent
HIV testing than app nonusers. Interested readers of SMMSA usage and risk behaviors for HIV infection are
referred to the literature review in [41] for more details.
The above two categories of literatures also focus on the analysis of SMMSAs, which serve as good inspirations
and motivations for our research. For example, they provided us with a number of references to explain the
findings we get in our study and elaborate their implications. However, these works did not investigate the
correlation between SMMSA users’ online digital footprints and their relationship status, which is a novel research
question.
Attribute inference in general social networks. Beyond the above literature about SMMSA, there are also
a number of research work such as [ 13,28,40,53], which infer different profile attributes in general online social
networks. Their motivations are generally framed from the perspective of privacy preserving. In the online
social networks, a user’s public data could be the list of pages or music liked or shared by the user, as well as
the user’s friend lists. There studies have demonstrated that an attacker can use a machine learning classifier
to infer a target user’s private attributes (e.g., gender, cities lived, and political view) based on the user’s public
data on social network. However, the above studies are mainly for general online social networks with different
motivations and implications. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to investigate the relationship status
inference on SMM-oriented social network.
3 DATASET DESCRIPTION
In the section, we will first present the overview of the dataset together with the process of its collection and
pre-processing. Then, we discuss the reliability and generalizability of the dataset, which is important for the
feasibility of this study.
3.1 Data Collection and Pre-Processing
The data we use in this study are collected through a popular SMMSA in China4. With millions of active users,
the app provides a number of functionalities, including updating personal profiles, sharing personal real-time
location, viewing nearby users, posting content, following other users, and so forth. The original dataset is
collected through a national population health project in China, which enables several on-going studies for the
welfare of SMM. The study in this paper only uses a subset of the entire dataset based on pre-processing. With
this in mind, we first introduce the collection process of the original data set, and then describe the specific
pre-processing for this study.
Original Dataset Collection. In the original national project, more than 7000 active app users in a mid-sized
city5are randomly recruited as participants to provide their screen names. The researchers choose this city for
data collection due to the following two reasons. First, this city has relatively large number of SMM and SMMSA
users in China. Second, through the collaboration with a Non-Governmental Organizations for SMM community
4To protect users’ privacy and avoid bringing stigma to app service provider, we choose not to mention the app’s name in this paper.
5To preserve user’ privacy and avoid bringing stigma to this city, the named of city is kept as anonymous in this paper.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.29:6 •Wang et al.
in this city, the researchers have the channel to recruit SMM volunteers for supporting our study (e.g., labeling
SMM-dedicated gathering places, verifying the self-reported relationship status, providing some insights about
our findings, etc.). During this process, each participant is provided with a consent form, in which the researchers
clearly state the purpose of the research and type of data to be collected. Then, with the provided screen name
as the searching index, the researchers collect their publicly available app usage data (e.g., profiles, friendship,
check-in locations, etc.) by writing a crawler. Thus, the original dataset spans from April 6, 2017 to Sept 28, 2017,
covering more than 7000 active users in a mid-sized city with their app usage data (e.g., profiles, friendship,
check-in locations, etc.).
Specific Pre-Processing for this Study. In this study, we use the relationship status in the profile data, which is
a binary label indicating whether the user is in a steady relationship or not. Thus, we only import the data of
those who have provided the relationship status (in total of 2,778 users). Besides, through further analysis of the
original data set, we found that, during the time span of this data set, 419 of the 2,778 users have changed their
relationship status labels at least one time. Since SMM users may not modify the status in the app immediately
after the change of their actual status, this subset of users were excluded in our study to ensure the rigor of
the results. Therefore, the filtered data set we used for data analysis includes 2,359 users with self-reported
relationship status labels and various types of app usage data on the SMMSA. Among the 2,359 users, 230 were in
steady relationships and 2,129 were not.
3.2 Ethical and Privacy Considerations
We took careful steps in this study to protect user privacy and preserve the ethics of research, and make sure
that it is compliant with the best-known practice of data mining research. (1) This study has been approved by
the research ethical committee of the authors’ institutes. (2) We have completely anonymized the dataset before
data mining, and the data are stored and processed on a private and HIPPA-compliant cloud server with strict
access control. (3) The overall process of data collection is compliant with the public privacy policy of the service
provider of the SMMSA, where we follow two important rules [ 52]. One is that we only collect and use data that
are publicly available on the app, and the other is that the collected data together with the results of analysis will
only be used for research purposes. (4) Last but not least, following the spirit of GDRP (General Data Protection
Regulation)6released by the European Union in 2018, we have anonymized the name of the application and the
name of the city throughout the article. This could better preserve users’ privacy and avoid bringing stigma to
sexual minorities or to the application provider.
3.3 Discussion of Reliability and Generalizability
In the perspective of our research goal, there are two major concerns regarding the usability of dataset. The first
concern is the reliability of users’ self-reported relationship status. If many users lie about their relationship status
on the app, then the data analysis results will not be convincing. The second concern is the generalizability, that
is, are the users in our dataset representative compared to millions of SMMSA users? Without this information,
the analysis results and inference model will lose the generalizability. To address these two concerns, we have
conducted the following verifications before doing the data analysis.
First, we organize an interview with 50 randomly volunteers who are also SMMSA users, in which we ask
them if their reported relationship status on the app is true. 96% of them (i.e., 48 volunteers) have confirmed
that the reported one is true. We believe that the users’ self-reported relationship status is generally reliable,
and we elaborate the reasons as follows. If people lie about their relationship status, there are generally two
cases: (a) Users in steady relationships report that they are not in. The partners are generally the users of the
same application, so that their partners will easily detect the lie and feel uncomfortable. For this reason, the
6https://gdpr-info.eu/ (General Data Protection Regulation)
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.Will Online Digital Footprints Reveal Your Relationship Status? An Empirical Study of Social Applications for ... •29:7
interviewees commonly insist that this situation is very rare, as users in steady relationships generally avoid
letting their partners think that they are lying on the relationship status. (b) Users not in steady relationships report
that they are in. The main purpose of these kinds of applications is dating, so that falsely claim being in steady
relationships will reduce the chances of attracting dating partners. For this reason, the interviewees commonly
believe that people are not motivated to do so. By summarizing the above two cases, we believe that the reported
relationship status is generally reliable, which can support the subsequent data analysis in our study as we have
more than 2000 sampled users. In fact, for the state-of-the-art research work of attribute inference (e.g., gender)
in social network applications, the reliability of labels is a common problem as they are usually filled by users
without any verification. Most of these works consider the user-filled value as ground truth without doing any
reliability check. On the contrary, we discuss and check their reliability before using them in the model training.
Although this process cannot fully guarantee the reliability of each self-provided label, we believe that it can
inspire similar types of research work in the future.
Second, we have conducted a verification to check if the users in our dataset are representative compared
to millions of SMMSA users. We investigate the age distribution of SMMSA users in China. According to the
authors of [ 14], the SMMSA users are mainly between 20-29 years old and they constituted 59.9% of all users. For
younger men (< 20 years of age), they constituted 4.0% of SMMSA users. For older men (> 30 years of age), they
constituted 36.1% of all users. Among our sampled users, 3.7% of users claimed that they are less than 20 years old
and 59.9% are between 20-29 years old. For users more than 30 years old, they constituted 36.4% of our sampled
users. The result of chi-square test reveals that the difference between the two age distribution is not significant
(𝜒2= 0.08, p = 0.96079), which indicates that the SMMSA users we sampled are representative to some degree.
4 APP USAGE DIFFERENCE ON DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIP STATUS
In this section, we examine and present the difference of online digital footprints for SMMSA users with different
relationship status. Specifically, we demonstrate their correlations in the following aspects: profile presentation,
social interaction, expression & sentiment, and spatial-temporal patterns. For each aspect, we first describe
the data analysis process and then show our findings. For the convenience of presentation, we use acronym
SMM-SD for SMM in steady relationships and SMM-NSD for SMM not in steady relationships. In this section,
single-variable statistic test is firstly adopted to filter out variables that are not significantly correlated, which
reduces the number of independent variables. Then, regression analysis is further used to reduce the effect of
multicollinearity and reveal the true effects of each independent variable after considering all other variables.
4.1 Profile Presentation
Profile data are the first thing to fill out when users register on the SMMSA, which display the most essential and
straightforward traits of SMMSA users. Our foremost question is: Do SMM with different relationship status
present different profiles? We examine the profile data by using t-test on numerical attributes including height,
weight, age and the color usage of profile image, and chi-square test on categorical attributes including sex role
and app usage purpose. We find that age, sex role, the color usage of profile image, and app usage purpose have
significant correlations with users’ relationship status.
Age. In general, we find that SMM-SD are older. The average age of SMM-SD is 29.57, while that of SMM-NSD
is 27.81 (t-value = 2.35, p-value = 0.02). To further understand the difference, we plot the cumulative distribution
function (CDF) in Figure 1, in which the CDF curve of SMM-SD is lower, indicating that SMM-SD are older. For
example, the proportion of users younger than 33 years old are 76.52% for SMM-SD, and it is 83.98% for SMM-
NSD. This difference is consistent with literatures for general population (including both SMM and non-SMM
individuals) [34], that is, the older someone is, the more likely he is in a steady relationship.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.29:8 •Wang et al.
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
18 28 38 48 58 68 78CDF
AgeSMM-SD SMM-NSD
Fig. 1. SMM in steady relationship are generally older
Sex Role. According to [ 50], there are three sex roles related to sex positions for SMM. SMM with top role are
those who penetrate, SMM with bottom role are those who receive penetration, and a versatile role engages in
both activities or is open to engaging in either activity. SMMSA users usually self-report their sex role in the
application. But this field is optional, and users are allowed to leave it blank. So there are 4 possible attribute
values for sex role in our research: top, bottom, versatile and blank/unknown. We compare the distribution of sex
role values for those in or not in steady relationships. We find that for SMM-SD: 42% are top and 9% are bottom,
while 23% are top and 22% are bottom for those SMM-NSD. We further plot the role proportion separated by
relationship status in Figure 2. It illuminates that SMM-SD have a higher proportion of top role than SMM-NSD
(𝜒2-value = 44.951, p-value«0.01). In order to further understand this phenomenon, we search for some literatures
that may provide reasons and explanations. For example, authors in [ 4,44] pointed out that "active" men (i.e., top
men) are usually more masculine and more likely to create long-term steady relationships with their partners.
App Usage Purpose. The SMMSA allows users to fill in their purposes of using the app, and there are five
possible choices in the checkbox, including "chatting", "dating", "looking for bromeo" (bromeo), "looking for
boyfriend" (boyfriend) and "looking for gym buddy" (gym buddy). A user could select at most three of them or
leave this check box blank. We compare the proportion of each app usage motivation in different relationship
status. As shown in Figure 3, we find the proportion distribution is discrepant in these two groups. Then we use
chi-square test to examine the difference. We find that SMM-NSD are more interested in finding dating partner
(𝜒2value=14.34, p-value«0.01) and boyfriend ( 𝜒2value = 64.377, p-value«0.01).
Profile Image. We extract several widely used computational aesthetics features (CA) to describe the color
usage of profile image [ 46]. Specifically, we describe the HSV (hue, saturation, and value) statistic of profile
image by extracting the average of hue, the average of saturation, the average of value, the standard deviation
of saturation, and the standard deviation of value. We also describe the warm and cool color usage of profile
image by extracting the percentage of different color pixels. For warm color, we calculate the average percentage
of orange, pink, red, white, brown, and yellow pixels. For cool color, we use the average percentage of black,
blue, grey, green, and purple pixels. We compare the average of CA features in different relationship status,
and find that SMM-SD are more likely to use profile image with lower saturation and warm color. Specifically,
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.Will Online Digital Footprints Reveal Your Relationship Status? An Empirical Study of Social Applications for ... •29:9
0%5%10%15%20%25%30%35%40%45%
blank bottom versatile topProportion
Sex RoleSMM-SD SMM-NSD
Fig. 2. Difference in sex role distribution
0%5%10%15%20%25%30%35%
chat date bremeo boyfriend gym buddyProportion
PurposeSMM-SD SMM-NSD
Fig. 3. Difference in app usage purpose
the average saturation of SMM-SD is 82.82, while the average saturation of SMM-NSD is 75.13(t-value=-2.11,
p-value«0.01). The warm color percentage of SMM-SD is 4.71%, while that of the SMM-NSD is only 3.24%
(t-value=2.13, p-value«0.01). As for the cool color, the cool color percentage of SMM-SD is 12.28%, while that of
the SMM-NSD is 14.35%(t-value=-2.84, p-value«0.01). To understand the potential reasons behind these findings,
we turn to some psychological research. According to the research about color theory, warm color are often
said to be related with active and positive emotion [ 9,33]. Considering that being in a steady relationship was
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.29:10 •Wang et al.
associated with positive psychology [ 55], our findings about user’s profile image are in consistent with previous
studies to some degree.
4.2 Social Interactions
The SMMSA dataset also includes rich information regarding the social interactions among users. For example,
with the follower and following data, we can reconstruct the friendship network, which charactrizes the friendships
among users. In addition to the network structure, we also incorporate users’ feedbacks to other users’ postings
into the social interaction information. For example, users can make thumb-up and comments on others’ postings.
Then another interesting question is: Do SMM in different relationship status present different social interaction
features? To explore this, we compare the features in social network structure and feedback to postings.
Social Network Structure. We use the follower and following data to re-construct the friendship network.
We explore several variables, including the number of followers and followings, the number of friends (a pair of
users who are each other’s followers are defined as friends according to the rule of the SMMSA in this study),
the number of blocked users, etc. Besides, we also examine other metrics such as degree and centrality, which
are the essential measures of a node’s importance in the social network research community [ 38]. The average
number of friends are 13.14 and 14.77 for SMM-SD and SMM-NSD, respectively, which is not significantly
different (t-value=0.60, p-value=0.55). Although the number of friends is not significantly different, we have other
interesting findings as described below.
First, we were wondering if the SMMSA users make friends selectively and purposely. For SMM-SD, 16.3% of
their friends are also in steady relationships, while for SMM-NSD, the number is only 9.2%. The difference is
statistically significant (t-value=6.64, p-value«0.01). We can see that SMM-NSD are more willing to make friends
with others who are also not in steady relationships. It might imply that those users intend to make friends with
more dating-related or sex-related purposes, which is consistent with our findings in the app usage purpose
described in Section 4.1.
Then, as SMM-NSD tend to be more willing to make friends with those also not in steady relationships, we
make a deeper hypothesis that they are more likely to be exposed to harassment [ 27]. For this reason, some
of them will turn to the anti-harassment mechanism (i.e., blocking someone) provided by the SMMSA more
frequently [ 48]. Thus, we choose the number of blocked users (from the blacklist information in the dataset)
as a measure for the degree of harassment they encountered, because more harassment might lead to a longer
blacklist. The average number of blocked users for SMM-SD is 13.93, and 18.92 for SMM-NSD. It shows that
SMM-NSD have more blocked users (t-value=4.94, p-value « 0.01). As the number of friends is not significantly
different for these two groups, it may imply that SMM-NSD are more vulnerable to harassment and therefore
block more. We also plot the cumulative distribution function (CDF) for SMM in different relationship status
by the number of blocked users respectively in Figure 4. As shown in the figure, the CDF curve of SMM-SD is
higher, which means that they have fewer blocked users. Moreover, there is a noticable rise of SMM-NSD around
50 blocked users. This is because the block limit of regular users is 50 for the app, but for those who have passed
verification required by the app, they can block more than 50.
In summary, it is possible that SMM-SD may be less willing to seek friends for dating or sex purposes on the
SMMSA and therefore receive less harassment. In contrast, SMM-NSD might be more willing to find friends
who are also not in steady relationships, because they are more likely to respond to sex-related or dating-related
requests. Correspondingly, they will receive more harassment and block more requests. This is in agreement
with what the authors in [ 1,6,21,35] revealed, that is, reducing the number of partners plays an important role
in mitigating HIV transmission, since SMM-NSD are more likely to seek more sex partners.
Friends’ Feedback to Postings. As for the posting, we compare the number of thumb-ups and comments
users received in different relationship status. It turns out the number of thumb-ups and comments are linked to
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.Will Online Digital Footprints Reveal Your Relationship Status? An Empirical Study of Social Applications for ... •29:11
relationship status. Specifically, the average number of thumb-ups and comments received per posting is 14.18
and 2.03 respectively for SMM-SD, while 10.72 thumb-ups and 1.62 comments respectively for SMM-SD, and the
difference of both these two indicators are significant (t-value=3.31, p-value«0.01, t-value = 3.66, p-value«0.01).
So we can see that SMM-SD receive more feedbacks in their postings.
4.3 Expression and Sentiment
Users can express themselves through postings in the SMMSA. Are SMM in steady relationships more likely to
express themselves? Are they expressing more positively or more negatively? We compare the proportion of users
who ever published postings, the number of postings, the average length of their postings and the sentiment of
SMM in different relationship status. The analysis results indicate that, among those variables, the proportion of
users ever published postings and the sentiment of postings are significantly correlated with relationship status.
Expression Willingness. We first verify two variables, i.e., number of postings and length of their postings.
We found that the average number of postings is 22.13 for SMM-SD while 21.66 for SMM-NSD (t-value=0.23,
p-value=0.82). Besides, the average length of postings is 761.54 characters for SMM-SD while 652.31 characters for
SMM-NSD (t-value=1.15, p-value=0.25). Thus, the difference is not statistically significant on these two variables.
Then, we divide SMM in each relationship status into two groups: users with postings (i.e., having at least one
posting) and users without postings. The proportion of users without postings is 30%, for SMM-SD is 30%, 37% for
SMM-NSD, and the difference is significant ( 𝜒2value=4.47, p-value=0.03). To demonstrate the result more clearly,
we plot the proportion of users who ever posted or nerver posted in different relationship status in Figure 5. We
can see that SMM-SD are more willing to express themselves in terms of postings.
Sentiment. Given that SMM-SD are more willing to express themselves, do they express more positively?
We apply a widely-used open API called SnowNLP7, which focuses on sentiment analysis for Chinese text, to
analyze the sentiment of each posting published by SMMSA users. The sentiment score returned by this API is a
real number between 0 and 1, where 0 represents totally negative and 1 represents totally positive. The average
sentiment score is 0.67 for SMM-SD, 0.63 for SMM-NSD, which indicates that SMM-SD express more positively
in their postings (t-value=2.60, p-value«0.01).
In summary, we can see that SMM-SD not only are more willing to express themselves through postings, but
also express more positively.
4.4 Spatial-Temporal Patterns
The SMMSA also provides check-in records including time and location, which build a bridge between online
behavior and offline activities in the real world. Knowing that SMM in different relationship status behave
differently online, we further ask the question: Do they present divergent activity modes in the real world? Do
they go to similar places? Do they use the SMMSA during similar time periods? To answer those questions, we
have conducted the following analyses.
Mobility Pattern. First, we check the total number of check-ins, but find it to be not significantly different
(124.96 vs. 122.96 for SMM in steady relationships or not, t-value = 0.23, t-test). Then, literatures such as
[21,37,49,55] show that SMM always meet or gather in some places (e.g., gay bar, bathroom, and parks). We
try to find places where SMM are likely to gather in the city we focus on. With check-in records of all users in
the dataset (one check-in record includes a user identification number, timestamp, longitude, and latitude), we
construct a heatmap in the city we study (see Figure. 6(left)). However, there are many common places such
as subway stations, restaurants and malls, where both SMM and non-SMM groups will visit and thus are not
semantically meaningful for SMM. For this reason, we invited 11 voluntary SMMSA users in our target city to
help select real SMM dedicated gathering places on the heatmap. Finally, based on their votes, we get eight places
7https://pypi.org/project/snownlp/0.11.1/
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.29:12 •Wang et al.
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
0 10 20 30 40 50 60CDF
Number of Blocked UsersSMM-SD SMM-NSD
Fig. 4. SMM not in steady relationship have more blocked users
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%
Never Posted PostedProportionSMM-SD SMM-NSD
Fig. 5. Difference in proportion of users with or without posting
from those candidate locations (see Figure. 6(right)). To examine their visit modes, we calculate the distance from
their check-in locations to these SMM dedicated gathering places. If the distance is less than a threshold, say 200
meters, we regard this check-in as a visit to a SMM dedicated gathering place. We define a metric 𝑃𝑖=𝐻𝑖/𝑉𝑖,
where𝑉𝑖is the total number of check-ins for user i and 𝐻𝑖is the number of check-ins by user i to those SMM
dedicated gathering places. We find that the average 𝑃𝑖is 3.0% and 3.69% for SMM-SD and SMM-NSD, respectively,
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.Will Online Digital Footprints Reveal Your Relationship Status? An Empirical Study of Social Applications for ... •29:13
Fig. 6. left: locations with more check-ins in the city; right: selected locations as SMM dedicated gathering places8
which is significantly different ( 𝜒2value= 37.61, p-value«0.01). It shows that SMM-NSD visit gathering places
more frequently.
Check-in Time Distribution. We also have interesting findings on the check-in time distribution. To explore
this, we plot the average check-in counts in every four hours during a day. As demonstrated in Figure 7top, there
are 7 waveforms representing the check-in pattern from Monday to Sunday, and each waveform consists of 6
points. The starting point shows check-in counts from 0:00 am to 4:00 am and the end point shows the check-in
count from 20:00pm to 24:00pm. We find that compared with the blue curve (SMM-SD), the red curve (SMM-NSD)
has a prominent pointed end on the upper right on weekdays. What is more, the red curve is generally higher
than the blue curve on weekends. We can see that SMM-NSD perform check-ins more frequently in the evening
of weekdays and nearly the whole day of weekends than SMM-SD. Thus, we make a hypothesis that SMM with
different relationship status may have different check-in time distribution during worktime and non-worktime.
Then we further divide the check-in time into worktime and non-worktime, where worktime is 9:00am-5:00pm
on weekdays and non-worktime is the rest of the week. Then we sum up check-in counts in different relationship
status to compare their check-in time distribution patterns. We compare the average counts and the proportion
of check-ins. The proportion of check-in counts during worktime is 35% for SMM-SD, 29% for SMM-NSD, so
SMM-SD are more likely to check-in during worktime than SMM-NSD ( 𝜒2value = 40.62, p-value«0.01, chi-square
test).
4.5 Multi-variable Regression Analysis and Summary of Findings
A limitation of the above single variable analysis method is that variables may affect each other. Thus, in order
to make the analysis result more rigorous, we further perform a regression analysis, that is, applying variables
verified by single variable hypothesis testing to the logistic regression model. According to the results of the
8To preserve privacy and avoid bringing stigma to the city we study, the name of locations has been eliminated from the map.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.29:14 •Wang et al.
0123456
Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat SunLogin Count
TimeSMM-SD SMM-NSD
00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.8
0 4 8 12 16 20 24Check -in  Count
TimeSMM-SD SMM-NSD
Fig. 7. Difference in check-in time distribution. top: Check-in time distribution; bottom: Taking Wednesdays as the example
to show check-in counts in weekdays
regression analysis in Table 1, the variable #TotalComment is not significant. We guess it might be caused by the
multi-collinearity, as some other variables may be highly correlated with the variable #TotalComment, which makes
the results to be potentially confounded. Thus, we further calculate the PCCs (Pearson correlation coefficient) to
test the correlation between #TotalComment (i.e., number of comments a user has received) and other variables.
Table 2shows the results of the PCCs. From these results we can find that the variable #TotalComment is highly
correlated with the variable #TotalDig (i.e., the number of thumb-ups a user has received).
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.Will Online Digital Footprints Reveal Your Relationship Status? An Empirical Study of Social Applications for ... •29:15
Table 1. The result of the regerssion analysis (***: p < 0.001, **: p < 0.01, *: p < 0.05)
Dimensions Variables Coef p-value Illustration
ProfileAge 0.0127 *** User’s age
Role0 -0.6070 *** Whether report bottom role
Role0.5 0.1215 *** Whether report versatile role
Role1 0.7832 *** Whether report top role
ForDate -0.7964 *** Whether have the purpose of dating
ForBoyfriend -1.4542 *** Whether have the purpose of looking
for boyfriend
#Saturation -1.1143 *** The mean saturation of the user’s pro-
file image
#warmColor -0.2180 ** The average percentage of orange,
pink, red, white, brown, and yellow
pixels
#coolColor 1.0501 *** The average percentage of black, blue,
grey, green, and purple pixels
Social Interactions#BlackCount -0.0208 *** The number of blocked users
#MateFriend 0.2656 *** The number of friends who are in
steady relationships
MateFriendPortion 0.0284 *** The proportion of frineds who are in
steady relationships
#TotalComment -0.0002 The number of comments users re-
ceived
#TotalDig 0.0002 *** The number of thumb-ups users re-
ceived
Expression and Sentiment#PostCount 0.0031 *** The number of posts users published
SentiScore 0.3262 *** Users’ sentiment score
Spatial-Temporal PatternsWorkTimePortion 0.0101 *** The proportion of check-in counts
during worktime
HotPoiPortion 0.0022 *** The proportion of visiting SMM gath-
ering places
Table 2. The results of the Pearson correlation analysis with TotalCommant
Variables Age Role0.5 ForDate #BlackCount #MateFriend ForBoyfriend
PCCs 0.0371 -0.0220 -0.0254 0.0437 0.0298 0.0165
Variables Role0 #Saturation #coolColor WorkTimePortion Role1 #TotalDig
PCCs -0.0147 0.0240 0.0201 0.0380 -0.0242 0.7221
Variables #PostCount SentiScore HotPoiPortion MateFriendPortion #warmColor
PCCs 0.0507 -0.0165 0.0480 0.0088 0.0091
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.29:16 •Wang et al.
Based on the extensive correlation analysis we have described above, we can summarize our findings as follows.
In terms of users’ presented profiles, we have found that: 1) SMM in steady relationships are generally older. 2)
Top role makes up a higher proportion for SMM in steady relationships. 3) SMM not in steady relationships are
more interested in finding dating partner and boyfriend. 4) SMM in steady relationships prefer profile image with
lower saturation and warm color such as orange, pink, red, and yellow.
In terms of social interactions, we have found that: 1) SMM not in steady relationships are more likely to make
friends with those also not in steady relationships. 2) SMM not in steady relationships have more blocked users
in their blacklists. 3) SMM in steady relationships receive more feedbacks to their postings.
In terms of expressions and sentiment indicated by postings, we have found that: 1) SMM in steady relationships
are more willing to express themselves in terms of postings. 2) SMM in steady relationships express more positively
in their postings.
In terms of spatial-temporal patterns shown in check-in locations and time, we have found that: 1) SMM not in
steady relationships visit their dedicated gathering places more frequently. 2) SMM in steady relationship are
more likely to check-in during worktime than those not in steady relationships.
5 RELATIONSHIP STATUS INFERENCE
In the previous section, we demonstrate that SMM in steady relationships or not behave differently on the SMMSA
from several aspects. With this in mind, another interesting question is that: Can we utilize this difference to infer
one’s relationship status? In this section, we answer this question by validating the predictive power.
5.1 Feature Extraction and Evaluation
The descriptive analysis in Section 4 have demonstrated the app usage difference in four aspects for SMMSA users
with different relationship status. However, although such indicated difference provide important inspiration for
building the inference model, we should also note that the descriptive analysis and building a predictive model
are two different threads [ 43]. Statistic-based descriptive analysis is designed for findings about the correlations
between variables, while predictive models are designed to make the most accurate predictions possible without
much expectation to be particularly interpretable.
With the different goals and process, although the correlated variables obtained from the statistic-based
descriptive analysis provide important insights and inspirations for the feature extraction in the predictive model
building (i.e., telling us the directions to extract features), it does not necessarily mean that these correlated
factors can be directly treated as the features in machine learning model. When establishing the predictive model,
more sophisticated features should be extracted and further transformed or selected. For example, in terms of
sentiment analysis in Section 4, we only demonstrate that an SMMSA user’s relationship status correlates to
the average emotionally positive score. However, in the feature extraction phase, we also exploit the variance
of a user’s emotionally positive score as a feature as it does contribute to the predictive model, though it is not
statistically significant as a single variable. Besides, it is true that some features may be collinear with others, but
we will leave it to the learning-based classification algorithms and feature selection modules to handle.
In summary, to train a good model for relationship status inference, we are inspired to extract 20 features
falling into four sets, namely profile-based features, social interaction based features, expression and sentiment
based features, and spatial-temporal patterns based features, which is summarized in Table 3.
We first justify the effectiveness of the extracted features, using the data shown in Table 4, where a Logistic
Regression (LR) model is employed to study the performance of individual sets of features and their combinations.
Due to the space limit, we present the performance of four combinations. From the results demonstrated in
Table 4, incorporating all feature sets in the model can obtain the best performance in terms of accuracy, precision,
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.Will Online Digital Footprints Reveal Your Relationship Status? An Empirical Study of Social Applications for ... •29:17
Table 3. Features for building the inference model
Dimension Feature Description
Profile-based features Age, role, sex degree of profile image, purpose-chat, purpose-boyfriend,
purpose-date, verified or not, saturation of profile image, ratio of profile
image’s warm color and cool color pixels
Social interaction based
featuresnumber of followers, number of followings, ,number of blocked users,
number of friends not in steady relationship
expression and sentiment
based featuresaverage sentiment score, variance of sentiment score, total number of
postings, number of postings per day, number of thumb-up per posting,
number of comments per posting.
Spatial-temporal pattern
based featurescheck-in count in gathering places, check-in in count in other places,
ratio of check-in count in working time
Table 4. RL-based classification comparison under different combinations of features (SI, PF, ES and ST represent social
interaction, profile, expression and sentiment, and spatial-temporal pattern, respectively).
Feature combinations Accuracy Precision F1 score False positive rate False negative rate
SI 0.587 0.585 0.558 0.362 0.467
SI+PF 0.706 0.721 0.697 0.261 0.326
SI+PF+ES 0.717 0.727 0.711 0.261 0.304
SI+PF+ES+ST 0.728 0.733 0.725 0.261 0.283
F1 score, false positive rate and false negative rate compared to other combinations. The results demonstrate that
the extracted four sets of features are effective in inferring relationship status.
5.2 Learning Models and Performance
As we have binary relationship labels in our dataset (i.e., in a steady relationship or not), we perform the
relationship status inference as a binary classification task. In our dataset, we observe that the number of SMM-
NSD is much larger than the number of SMM-SD, which introduces the data imbalance problem. To this end, we
use an undersampling-based approach in [ 32] to address this issue as data pre-processing. That is, we sample
several subsets from the majority class (i.e., users who are not in steady relationships), and combine each of them
with the records with minority class (i.e., the SMM-SD users)
Then, on the undersampled dataset, we apply several widely used machine models as baselines, including
Decision Tree (DT), Logistic Regression (LR), Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF), Bernouli Naive
Bayes (BNB), Gaussian Naive Bayes (GNB), Gradient Boosting Classifier (GBC) and Ridge Regression (Ridge)
to train the classification models, which provides a good coverage of state-of-the-art feature-based learning
models. All the classification models are trained and tested by using 5-cross validation approach. We have also
added the Probabilistic Guess (PG) baseline which directly infer the relationship status according to the ratio of
these two groups on our collected datasets. Besides, we also compare different classifiers with a human-based
classifier (called HUMAN). In this baseline, 7 volunteers are recruited, and each of them is asked to view the same
set of publicly available pages belonging to 100 randomly selected SMMSA users (including profiles, postings,
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.29:18 •Wang et al.
Table 5. Classification performance comparison of different learning models
Method Accuracy Precision F1 score False positive rate False negative rate
PG 0.521 0.555 0.185 0.085 0.888
DT 0.663 0.640 0.674 0.383 0.289
LR 0.750 0.739 0.747 0.255 0.244
SVM 0.739 0.723 0.739 0.277 0.244
RF 0.674 0.667 0.667 0.319 0.333
BNB 0.597 0.576 0.618 0.468 0.333
GNB 0.510 0.500 0.081 0.042 0.955
GBC 0.717 0.727 0.711 0.261 0.304
Ridge 0.706 0.725 0.682 0.234 0.356
Human 0.530 0.531 0.515 0.440 0.500
social relationships, and check-in locations) and then make a judge about their relationship status. Then, we use
majority voting methods to infer the relationship status of each SMMSA user.
The classification performance comparison is shown in Table 5with the metrics of accuracy, precision, F1
score, false positive rate and false negative rate. Here we should also note that when calculating the false positive
and false negative rate, we regard the SMM-SD as positive cases because of primary motivation of this paper is
to identify SMM in steady relationships. From this table, we can draw the following conclusions. First, most of
the learning-based classification models, which use the full set of extracted features in this study, significantly
outperform the human-based classifier. Previous studies have discussed several major advantages of computers
over humans in dealing with such classification problems. For example, segalin et al. think that computers have
the ability to store a large amount of information, which is difficult for humans to access [ 45]. Wei et al. believe
that computers can utilize a tremendous amount of information to optimize the judgmental accuracy, while
humans may be affected by various biases sometimes [ 54]. Second, among these learning models, LR model
achieves the best performance in terms of accuracy, precision, F1 score and false positive rate, while GNB is the
worst on these metrics. Both LR and SVM obtain the best false negative rate. Although we have conducted a
multi-variable regression analysis, we still can’t keep variables are independent of each other. Given that the
independence between variables is the main modeling assumption of GNB, we believe that it is the correlation
between variables that affect the effectiveness of GNB [ 36]. Third, by comparing the performance of RL with that
in Table 4, we can see that the model can be improved by the undersampling operation.
6 DISCUSSIONS
In this section, we first present some practical implications of our findings in Section 6.1, that is, how they may
benefit real-world applications. Then, we point out some limitations and present interesting research directions
for future work in Section 6.2.
6.1 Implications
This work is primarily motivated by the requirement of identifying SMM in steady relationships so that they can
receive relevant service delivery. However, the potential benefits and implications of this study are beyond this
inference model, which may be used to better understand the SMM community and improve their welfare .
Better Understanding About SMM Community. This paper is a descriptive analysis of how SMM both in and
outside a steady relationship behaviorally differ in their interactions with a popular dating app in China. We dig
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.Will Online Digital Footprints Reveal Your Relationship Status? An Empirical Study of Social Applications for ... •29:19
deep into finding statistically significant correlations in behavior between those two groups. Some of findings
are in line with our common sense, which is not surprising. For example, the order people are more likely to be
in the steady relationships. Another finding falling to this category is that people outside steady relationships
are more interested in finding dating partners. However, some of the findings are more interesting and even
unexpected. For example, we found that SMM in steady relationship are more willing to express themselves
through postings and express more positively. To seek the potential reasons and behavioral insights behind,
we turn to some literatures about the psychological research in the community of SMM. Through a large-scale
interviews and surveys, the authors of research work such as [ 39,55] revealed that SMM with steady partners
has less trouble in terms of psychological problems (e.g., stress, depression, and anxiety). With this in mind, our
finding from the perspective of digital footprints is in consistent with it, which provide an impressive reminder
that we need to take care of the psychological wellbeing of SMM outside steady relationships more seriously.
Another interesting thing is that, through the analysis of time-stamped check-in data, we found that the SMM in
steady relationships use the SMMSA more frequently in working time. To explore the reason behind it, we further
conducted an interview with ten SMM volunteers, and many of them clarify that this is because SMM-SD are
more likely to disclose their sexual orientation to others, so that they often feel free to use it in their workplaces.
In contrast, SMM-NSD tend to hide their sexual orientation, so that they are more cautious to activate the app
at their workplaces. Typical statements from the interviewee of SMM-NSD are "I rarely use it in the workplace,
because it will make me feel embarrassed if someone knows I am using the gay dating app" and"I only check the app
when going to some more private space in the company (e.g., the restroom)". This finding indirectly reflects the fact
that this community still suffer from severe social stigma in China. So, how about the situations in other cultures
or countries (e.g., countries allowing for same-sex marriage, or others holding even lower tolerance than China)?
Will there be a significance difference? This motivates the researchers including us for future studies if similar
data of the counterpart apps in other countries can be obtained.
Optimizing the Design of SMMSA. The findings of our research help to optimize the functionality of SMMSA.
First, it provides a privacy alert for service providers of social apps. To protect user privacy, most of the SMMSAs
set the checkbox of relationship status as optional, and users can choose to leave this field blank if they are not
willing to disclose it. However, our findings revealed a potential risk of privacy leakage, that is, an adversary may
infer users’ relationship status with other clues on the app. With this in mind, our findings also provide guidance
for the service provider to design better privacy preserving mechanisms. For example, the apps can recommend
users to hide other discriminative information (e.g., number of blocked users) if they do not want to disclose
their relationship status. Second, in terms of friend recommendation, users with different relationship status may
have different preferences [ 27], and identifying the status can help optimize the friend recommendation modules.
For example, the app can recommend more friends with common interests to those in steady relationships, while
recommending more friends with appropriate dating profiles (e.g., matched sex role and age) to those not in
steady relationships.
Obtaining Large-scale Dataset for Research. Although there have been much social science research focusing
on how relationship status may influence SMM’s behavior [ 1,6,21,35], the common remaining challenge lies
in data collection. In these studies, researchers recruited participants in some SMM dedicated gathering places
(e.g., gay bar, parks, bathrooms), and acquired their relationship status through questionnaires and interviews.
However, due to existing homophobia, discrimination and stigma towards homosexuality, many SMM choose to
hide their sexual orientation, as such this group remains extremely hidden. Thus, although this is an effective
approach in a small scale (e.g., on a university campus), it is difficult to acquire a large number of samples with
labelled relationship status at a larger scale (e.g., city, state or even nation scale). The findings in our study
provide a promising way of automatically constructing a larger-scale dataset with much less cost. With the
extracted features and learning model, we can accurately infer the relationship status of a large number of SMM.
It may assist sociologists to better evaluate its influence on SMM’s behavior at a large scale, and ultimately
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.29:20 •Wang et al.
provide references or even evidence for policymakers or lawmakers. For example, using more data with inferred
relationship status labels, we can assess whether a steady relationship really help to control HIV transmission. If
this is true, then allowing same-sex marriage is not only a human right that is "politically correct", but also plays
an extremely positive role in public health management [29].
6.2 Limitations and Future Work
As the pioneering study of exploring SMM’s relationship status from their SMMSA usage data, our work still has
several aspects to improve and is promising to explore new research directions for SMM-related research.
Beyond the Binary Label. In this study, we only use the self-reported binary label in the SMMSA as the
relationship status, which indicates whether a person has a steady homosexual relationship or not. However,
in terms of the relationship status of SMM, there are many other indicators [ 21,37,49,55], such as number of
partners, marriage status9, children adoption status, etc. In the future, we plan to conduct a deeper investigation
of SMM’s relationship status by introducing more indicators.
Evaluating and Improving the Generalizability. Through an interesting dataset, we reveal several interesting
findings and indicate the potential power of the inference model. However, the generalizability of the model
should be further evaluated in other contexts. First, we should further test the model to see if they are also
effective for users without reporting their relationship status (i.e., the non-reporters). This is because we cannot
currently prove that self-reporters are not different from non-reporters on their behaviors, though they quite
reasonably could be. In future work, we plan to recruit a number of SMM volunteers (e.g., 500 volunteers) who did
not report their relationship status on the dating apps, and verify if our model can accurately predict their status.
Second, although we have demonstrated that the dataset is representative to some degree (by comparing with the
age distribution statistics in China in Section 3), a question may arise as to if the data can successfully represent
all SMMSA users worldwide. For example, as illustrated in [ 16], the usage behavior of SMM users across different
cultures may be diverse. Hence, one promising research direction is to collect more data on other apps (e.g.,
Grindr and Jack’d), and then study if the findings and model can be transferred, or any other different findings will
be obtained. In summary, our work provides a novel and interesting perspective to investigate the relationship
status with SMMSA usage data, but computing a more generalized model for helping SMM worldwide still needs
more efforts in terms of wider data collection, more sophisticated model training and evaluation.
Utilizing Unlabeled Data. In this work, we only used data from users who reported relationship status labels
while discarding the data of unlabeled users. Actually, semi-supervised machine learning methods (e.g., co-training
algorithms) may help improve the inference accuracy with unlabeled data [ 59]. However, as the users’ relationship
status may have changed during the time span and we do not know the time point of change, it is difficult to
utilize the unlabeled data in the learning process, and this is the reason why we did not use unlabeled data in this
study. In our future work, one promising way is training a classifier to infer whether one’s relationship status has
changed, and then use it to select unlabeled data to enable semi-supervised learning methods.
Balancing the Privacy Preserving and Inference Accuracy. In order to improve the inference accuracy, it would
need to ask permission to gather private information, which raises more privacy threats. If we intend to use the
proposed approach in real-world settings, this should be carefully considered. We need to seek a trade-off between
the prediction accuracy and the privacy preserving, which should be further considered in the future work. If the
contribution of a certain set privacy-sensitive features is limited in terms of accuracy, we should consider if it is
worth collecting and injecting them into the classification model. For example, the spatial-temporal features only
contribute slightly to the relationship status inference, but these features are rather sensitive to collect. In this
case, if the application does not have a very high accuracy requirement, we would better to exclude them from
the model.
9Same-sex marriage has become legal in some countries, but China is currently not one of them.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.Will Online Digital Footprints Reveal Your Relationship Status? An Empirical Study of Social Applications for ... •29:21
7 CONCLUSION
Motivated by the requirement of identifying SMM with steady relationships to enable more precise services, this
paper has presented an empirical study of relationship status for SMM from the mobile social app’s perspective.
Our study is based on a dataset collected from a popular SMMSA in China. The filtered dataset contains 2,359
active users in a mid-sized city with their self-reported relationship status and multi-modality app usage data
during a period of more than five months. We conducted a comprehensive correlation analysis from multiple
aspects, including profile, social interactions, expression and sentiment, and spatial-temporal patterns. With
significant correlations, we extracted a number of features for relationship status inference via machine learning
algorithms. Finally, we elaborated on the implications of our findings from several perspectives, which show the
potential significance in better understanding SMM and improving their social warfare.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was mainly funded by NSFC Grant (No.91546203).
REFERENCES
[1]Barry D Adam, Trevor A Hart, Jack Mohr, Todd Coleman, and Julia Vernon. 2017. HIV-related syndemic pathways and risk subjectivities
among gay and bisexual men: a qualitative investigation. Culture, Health & Sexuality 19, 11 (2017), 1254–1267.
[2]Tim Althoff, Pranav Jindal, and Jure Leskovec. 2017. Online actions with offline impact: How online social networks influence online
and offline user behavior. In Proceedings of the tenth ACM international conference on web search and data mining. 537–546.
[3]Veanne N Anderson. 2018. Cisgender men and trans prejudice: Relationships with sexual orientation and gender self-esteem. Psychology
of Men & Masculinity 19, 3 (2018), 373.
[4]J Michael Bailey, Peggy Y Kim, Alex Hills, and Joan AW Linsenmeier. 1997. Butch, femme, or straight acting? Partner preferences of gay
men and lesbians. Journal of personality and social psychology 73, 5 (1997), 960.
[5]Fabrício Benevenuto, Tiago Rodrigues, Meeyoung Cha, and Virgílio Almeida. 2009. Characterizing user behavior in online social
networks. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement. 49–62.
[6]Chris Beyrer, Stefan D Baral, Chris Collins, Eugene T Richardson, Patrick S Sullivan, Jorge Sanchez, Gift Trapence, Elly Katabira, Michel
Kazatchkine, Owen Ryan, et al .2016. The global response to HIV in men who have sex with men. The Lancet 388, 10040 (2016), 198–206.
[7]Cedric H Bien, John M Best, Kathryn E Muessig, Chongyi Wei, Larry Han, and Joseph D Tucker. 2015. Gay apps for seeking sex partners
in China: implications for MSM sexual health. AIDS and Behavior 19, 6 (2015), 941–946.
[8]Jeremy Birnholtz, Colin Fitzpatrick, Mark Handel, and Jed R Brubaker. 2014. Identity, identification and identifiability: The language
of self-presentation on a location-based mobile dating app. In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on Human-computer
interaction with mobile devices & services. 3–12.
[9]Ake Bjerstedt. 1960. Warm-cool color preferences as potential personality indicators: preliminary note. Perceptual and Motor Skills 10, 1
(1960), 31–34.
[10] Courtney Blackwell, Jeremy Birnholtz, and Charles Abbott. 2015. Seeing and being seen: Co-situation and impression formation using
Grindr, a location-aware gay dating app. New media & society 17, 7 (2015), 1117–1136.
[11] Blued. 2018. Introduction of Buled. https://www.blued.com/cn/aboutus.html.
[12] Kaylee E Burnham, Dean G Cruess, Moira O Kalichman, Tamar Grebler, Chauncey Cherry, and Seth C Kalichman. 2016. Trauma
symptoms, internalized stigma, social support, and sexual risk behavior among HIV-positive gay and bisexual MSM who have sought
sex partners online. AIDS care 28, 3 (2016), 347–353.
[13] Zhipeng Cai, Zaobo He, Xin Guan, and Yingshu Li. 2016. Collective data-sanitization for preventing sensitive information inference
attacks in social networks. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing 15, 4 (2016), 577–590.
[14] Bolin Cao, Chuncheng Liu, Gabriella Stein, Weiming Tang, John Best, Ye Zhang, Bin Yang, Shujie Huang, Chongyi Wei, and Joseph D
Tucker. 2017. Faster and riskier?: Online context of sex seeking among men who have sex with men in China. Sexually transmitted
diseases 44, 4 (2017), 239.
[15] Benjamin D Capistrant, Lindsey Lesher, Nidhi Kohli, Enyinnaya N Merengwa, Badrinath Konety, Darryl Mitteldorf, William G West, and
BR Rosser. 2018. Social Support and Health-Related Quality of Life Among Gay and Bisexual Men With Prostate Cancer.. In Oncology
nursing forum, Vol. 45.
[16] Lik Sam Chan. 2016. How sociocultural context matters in self-presentation: A comparison of US and Chinese profiles on Jack’d, a
mobile dating app for men who have sex with men. International Journal of Communication 10 (2016), 20.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.29:22 •Wang et al.
[17] Dustin T Duncan, William C Goedel, Christopher B Stults, William J Brady, Forrest A Brooks, Jermaine S Blakely, and Daniel Hagen.
2018. A study of intimate partner violence, substance abuse, and sexual risk behaviors among gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex
with men in a sample of geosocial-networking smartphone application users. American journal of men’s health 12, 2 (2018), 292–301.
[18] Cally Gatehouse, Matthew Wood, Jo Briggs, James Pickles, and Shaun Lawson. 2018. Troubling Vulnerability: Designing with LGBT
Young People’s Ambivalence Towards Hate Crime Reporting. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1–13.
[19] Evan Gerstmann. 2017. Same-sex Marriage and the Constitution. Cambridge University Press.
[20] Gilbert Gonzales. 2014. Same-sex marriage—A prescription for better health. New England Journal of Medicine 370, 15 (2014), 1373–1376.
[21] Jeremy Greenwood, Philipp Kircher, Cezar Santos, and Michèle Tertilt. 2017. The role of marriage in fighting HIV: A quantitative
illustration for Malawi. American economic review 107, 5 (2017), 158–62.
[22] David Gudelunas. 2012. There’s an app for that: The uses and gratifications of online social networks for gay men. Sexuality & Culture
16, 4 (2012), 347–365.
[23] Andrea Guschlbauer, Nathan Grant Smith, Jack DeStefano, and Daniel E Soltis. 2019. Minority stress and emotional intimacy among
individuals in lesbian and gay couples: Implications for relationship satisfaction and health. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships
36, 3 (2019), 855–878.
[24] Oliver L Haimson, Jed R Brubaker, and Gillian R Hayes. 2014. DDFSeeks same: sexual health-related language in online personal ads for
men who have sex with men. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1615–1624.
[25] Mark J Handel and Irina Shklovski. 2012. Disclosure, ambiguity and risk reduction in real-time dating sites. In Proceedings of the 17th
ACM international conference on Supporting group work. 175–178.
[26] Jean Hardy and Silvia Lindtner. 2017. Constructing a desiring user: Discourse, rurality, and design in location-based social networks. In
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing. 13–25.
[27] Mitchell Hobbs, Stephen Owen, and Livia Gerber. 2017. Liquid love? Dating apps, sex, relationships and the digital transformation of
intimacy. Journal of Sociology 53, 2 (2017), 271–284.
[28] Jinyuan Jia and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. 2018. Attriguard: A practical defense against attribute inference attacks via adversarial machine
learning. In 27th{USENIX }Security Symposium ( {USENIX }Security 18). 513–529.
[29] Philip M Kayal. 2018. Bearing witness: Gay men’s health crisis and the politics of AIDS. Routledge.
[30] Maura Kelly and Elizabeth Hauck. 2015. Doing housework, redoing gender: Queer couples negotiate the household division of labor.
Journal of GLBT Family Studies 11, 5 (2015), 438–464.
[31] Justin J Lehmiller and Michael Ioerger. 2014. Social networking smartphone applications and sexual health outcomes among men who
have sex with men. PloS one 9, 1 (2014).
[32] Xu-Ying Liu, Jianxin Wu, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. 2008. Exploratory undersampling for class-imbalance learning. IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics) 39, 2 (2008), 539–550.
[33] Bruce MacEvoy. 2009. Color temperature.
[34] Wendy D Manning, Susan L Brown, and Krista K Payne. 2014. Two decades of stability and change in age at first union formation.
Journal of Marriage and Family 76, 2 (2014), 247–260.
[35] Sharif Mowlabocus. 2016. Gaydar culture: Gay men, technology and embodiment in the digital age. Routledge.
[36] Andrew Y Ng and Michael I Jordan. 2002. On discriminative vs. generative classifiers: A comparison of logistic regression and naive
bayes. In Advances in neural information processing systems. 841–848.
[37] Abigail Ocobock. 2013. The power and limits of marriage: Married gay men’s family relationships. Journal of Marriage and Family 75, 1
(2013), 191–205.
[38] Evelien Otte and Ronald Rousseau. 2002. Social network analysis: a powerful strategy, also for the information sciences. Journal of
information Science 28, 6 (2002), 441–453.
[39] John E Pachankis. 2014. Uncovering clinical principles and techniques to address minority stress, mental health, and related health risks
among gay and bisexual men. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice 21, 4 (2014), 313–330.
[40] Jianwei Qian, Xiang-Yang Li, Chunhong Zhang, and Linlin Chen. 2016. De-anonymizing social networks and inferring private attributes
using knowledge graphs. In IEEE INFOCOM 2016-The 35th Annual IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE,
1–9.
[41] Artur Acelino Francisco Luz Nunes Queiroz, Álvaro Francisco Lopes de Sousa, Telma Maria Evangelista de Araújo, Francisco Braz Milanez
de Oliveira, Maria Eliete Batista Moura, and Renata Karina Reis. 2017. A review of risk behaviors for HIV infection by men who have
sex with men through geosocial networking phone apps. Journal of the Association of Nurses in AIDS Care 28, 5 (2017), 807–818.
[42] Pamela Anne Quiroz. 2013. From Finding the Perfect Love Online to Satellite Dating and ‘Loving-the-One-You’re Near’ A Look at
Grindr, Skout, Plenty of Fish, Meet Moi, Zoosk and Assisted Serendipity. Humanity & Society 37, 2 (2013), 181–185.
[43] Bruce Ratner. 2017. Statistical and Machine-Learning Data Mining:: Techniques for Better Predictive Modeling and Analysis of Big Data.
Chapman and Hall/CRC.
[44] Theo GM Sandfort. 2005. Sexual orientation and gender: Stereotypes and beyond. Archives of Sexual Behavior 34, 6 (2005), 595–611.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.Will Online Digital Footprints Reveal Your Relationship Status? An Empirical Study of Social Applications for ... •29:23
[45] Cristina Segalin, Fabio Celli, Luca Polonio, Michal Kosinski, David Stillwell, Nicu Sebe, Marco Cristani, and Bruno Lepri. 2017. What
your facebook profile picture reveals about your personality. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM international conference on Multimedia.
460–468.
[46] Crisitina Segalin, Alessandro Perina, Marco Cristani, and Alessandro Vinciarelli. 2016. The pictures we like are our image: continuous
mapping of favorite pictures into self-assessed and attributed personality traits. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 8, 2 (2016),
268–285.
[47] Samuel Hardman Taylor, Jevan Alexander Hutson, and Tyler Richard Alicea. 2017. Social consequences of Grindr use: Extending
the Internet-enhanced self-disclosure hypothesis. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
6645–6657.
[48] Evangelos Tziallas. 2015. Gamified eroticism: Gay male “social networking” applications and self-pornography. Sexuality & Culture 19, 4
(2015), 759–775.
[49] Debra Umberson, Mieke Beth Thomeer, Rhiannon A Kroeger, Amy C Lodge, and Minle Xu. 2015. Challenges and opportunities for
research on same-sex relationships. Journal of Marriage and Family 77, 1 (2015), 96–111.
[50] Steven G Underwood. 2012. Gay men and anal eroticism: Tops, bottoms, and versatiles. Routledge.
[51] Chad Van De Wiele and Stephanie Tom Tong. 2014. Breaking boundaries: The uses & gratifications of Grindr. In Proceedings of the 2014
ACM international joint conference on pervasive and ubiquitous computing. 619–630.
[52] Lita Van Wel and Lambèr Royakkers. 2004. Ethical issues in web data mining. Ethics and Information Technology 6, 2 (2004), 129–140.
[53] Svitlana Volkova, Yoram Bachrach, Michael Armstrong, and Vijay Sharma. 2015. Inferring latent user properties from texts published in
social media. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
[54] Xingjie Wei and David Stillwell. 2017. How smart does your profile image look? Estimating intelligence from social network profile
images. In Proceedings of the tenth ACM international conference on web search and data mining. 33–40.
[55] Richard G Wight, Allen J LeBlanc, and MV Lee Badgett. 2013. Same-sex legal marriage and psychological well-being: findings from the
California Health Interview Survey. American journal of public health 103, 2 (2013), 339–346.
[56] Hailey Winetrobe, Eric Rice, Jose Bauermeister, Robin Petering, and Ian W Holloway. 2014. Associations of unprotected anal intercourse
with Grindr-met partners among Grindr-using young men who have sex with men in Los Angeles. AIDS care 26, 10 (2014), 1303–1308.
[57] Shangwei Wu and Janelle Ward. 2018. The mediation of gay men’s lives: A review on gay dating app studies. Sociology Compass 12, 2
(2018), e12560.
[58] Tien Ee Dominic Yeo and Yu Leung Ng. 2016. Sexual risk behaviors among apps-using young men who have sex with men in Hong
Kong. AIDS care 28, 3 (2016), 314–318.
[59] Wang Zhan and Min-Ling Zhang. 2017. Inductive semi-supervised multi-label learning with co-training. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 1305–1314.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 29. Publication date: March 2020.