Namibian and American Cultural 
Orientations Toward Facebook
 
 
Abstract 
Nadkarni and Hofman’s [8 ] meta-review of literature on 
Facebook usa ge recommends examining differences in 
Facebook use between collectivistic and individualistic 
cultures.  We discuss early findings of an exploratory 
study to compare use between participants in America , 
Namibia, and expatriate Namibians. From this, we 
identified five key areas of difference: 1) Motivations 
for joining Facebook; 2) Attitude toward Facebook 
connections; 3) Self presentation and photo sharing; 4) 
Communication about death, religion, and politics; 5) 
General privacy definitions. However, our findings 
showed no statistical difference in the Collectivism 
Scale [10] administered among the three groups, 
despite Namibia being considered a highly collectivistic 
county [12 ] and the US being a highly individualistic 
country [6].   
Author Keywords 
Facebook; Culture; Digital Convergence; Privacy; Social 
Networking; Collectivism-Individualism; Namibia 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation , (e.g. 
HCI)]: Miscellaneous; 
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s) . 
CHI’12, May 5 –10, 2012, Austin, Texas , USA . 
ACM 978-1-4503-1016-1/12/05 . Anicia N. Peters  
Iowa State University  
Virtual Reality Applications Center  
1620 Howe Hall  
Ames, IA 50011, USA  
anpeters@iastate.edu  
 
Michael A. Oren  
Iowa State University  
Virtual Reality Applications Center  
1620 Howe Hall  
Ames, IA 50011, USA  
moren@alumni.iastate.edu  
 
Nicola J. Bidwell  
CSIR Meraka Institute & School of ICT  
Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University  
P.O. Box 395  
Pretoria, 0001, South Africa  
nic.bidwell@gmail.com   
  
 
Work-in-Progress
CHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA
2603Introduction 
Facebook reports that over 80% of its 845 million users 
are located outside of the US [4] . However, very few of 
the numerous studies on Facebook focus on non-
Western and/or developing countries; despite criticism 
that such online spaces affirm offline cultural hegemony 
[3]. Wang, Norcie and Cranor [ 11] observed paucity in 
the number of studies relating to social networking 
sites’ privacy issues in developing regions while other 
studies (e.g. [2]) note incompatibilities between 
Facebook and communalist practices in rural villages. 
Nadkarni and Hofman n’s [8 ] recommend examining 
Facebook use in collectivistic and individualistic 
cultures. Thus, we explored how people who originate 
from a collectivistic culture, in a developing country, 
orient using Facebook, a social technology created in a n 
individualistic culture. Our exploratory study compared 
US Americans to two groups of Namibians, one group 
who study and live outside Namibia and the other who 
reside in their own country. We examined Facebook’s 
use and its influences on privacy with respect to 
friendships, religion, politics and life-change events 
such as births, deaths and career changes.  
Methods 
We adopted a mixed methods approach to inform an 
understanding of Facebook use and cultural similarities 
and differences. 
Facebook data content analysis 
As a preliminary study, we requested users in Namibia 
and the US to release their Facebook data consisting of 
wall posts, pictures and profile information to us. This 
method required us (the researchers) to request some 
of our Facebook friends and previous acquaintances to 
provide us with Facebook data for a six-month period. We obtained files from ten Namibians and two 
Americans as both groups found it difficult and time 
consuming to export, edit and transfer the data files. 
Surprisingly, 70% of the Namibian data files were from 
Namibians studying and living outside Namibia. The 
content analysis informed our interview- and survey 
questions as well as led us to identify a sub-group of 
Namibians who showed differences to local Namibians , 
namely expatriate Namibians who lived outside 
Namibia. 
Interviews and online survey 
Interviews and online surveys consisted of 74 questions 
on general social networking site exposure and usage, 
Facebook usage and privacy views, and Facebook’s 
impact on privacy related to life-change events such as 
births, death, career moves, religion and politics. We 
also included a collectivism scale [10 ].  
Participants 
Using snowball sampling, our study compared ten US 
Americans; ten Namibians who were resident in their 
country and ten expatriate Namibians, who were 
studying/living abroad. Male/female ratios in samples 
were 5:5, 2:8 and 4:6 and the mean ages were 35 
(expat Namibians), 32 (local Namibians) and 28 
(Americans). All participants had Internet access both 
at home and work/school .  
The American participants interviewed consisted of 
three undergraduate students, one non-student and six 
graduate students. The ethnic diversity was three 
African-Americans, one Hispanic and six Whites and 
native languages spoken were English and one Spanish. 
20% of the Americans had travelled outside of the US, 
although all of them had lived in several states of the 
US and none of them lived in their birth community. 
Work-in-Progress
CHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA
2604They maintain close ties with immediate family, but 
less so with extended family. The occupations and field 
of studies of American participants were more or less 
comparable to the Namibian participants.  
The ten expatriate Namibians (expats) consisted of 
different tribes/ethnic groups: four Owambos, one 
Herero, one Masubia (Caprivian), two Coloreds and two 
Basters. Their native languages were Oshiwambo, 
Otjiherero, Subia, Afrikaans and English. All expats 
were mostly graduate students currently based in 
different countries such as US, India, Malaysia, Canada 
or who had lived in Germa ny. 
The ten Namibian locals consisted of six Owambos, one 
Damara, one Baster and two Coloreds with native 
languages being Oshiwambo, Damara/Nama, Afrikaans 
and English. All Namibians had a minimum of a 
Bachelors degree mostly from one of the local 
universities in Namibia and most were in careers 
comparable to the US participants. Most of the expat 
Namibians and all local Namibians had been born in a 
rural/semi-urban village/town and moved to the capital 
city (urban) later in life for studies or careers.  
Results and Discussion 
All three groups showed no significant differences on 
the individualistic-collectivistic scale (p>.05). All three 
groups showed similarities in most of their Facebook 
activities, frequency of access and usage, friends, 
awareness of privacy settings and actual privacy setting 
adjustments. Since there were so many similarities, we 
will limit our discussion only to the main differences we 
found. 
Motivations for joining Facebook 
Namibians had no prior social networking experience 
prior to Facebook in contrast with 20% of expats and 80% of Americans who had prior social network use 
such as MySpace. Americans had been active on 
Facebook for a mean of 5 years and local and expat 
Namibians at 4.5 and 3.5 years respectively. 
Namibians joined Facebook to keep in touch with 
friends and family, keep up with the gossip, find long-
lost friends and because of Facebook’s popularity. 
American participants joined Facebook mostly to keep 
in touch with professional colleagues and as part of the 
College experience, but also to keep in touch with 
family and friends . This difference also reflects that 
Namibians joined Facebook much later than Americans 
after it was opened beyond the college crowd. 
Families & Friends 
Namibians maintained on average closer ties online and 
offline with immediate and extended family than the 
American participants. Namibians also accepted all 
friend requests , which contrasts with Americans.  
Namibians’ reasons for accepting unknown friend 
requests were mostly that they were open to learn from 
others and evaluated what the prospective “friend” 
wrote on his/her walls, his/her pictures, mutual friends, 
gender, looks, location and career. Another reason is 
that Namibians might consider it rude to deny friend 
requests. This surfaced in a Facebook thread when one 
friend suggested that another friend, concerned by this 
dilemma, should accept the unknown requests and then 
remove the unknown “friends” later.   
A few of the Americans also had unknown friends, but 
they rather evaluated friend requests on the basis of 
whether they knew each other and how the “friendship” 
would benefit them. Most American interviewees 
indicated that they simply deny or ignore unknown 
friend requests and one of the few who had unknown 
Work-in-Progress
CHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA
2605friends indicated that those were relatives that he had 
never met before. 
Namibians tend not to remove friends, but do restrict 
certain friends or groups from seeing their posts and 
photos. If they did remove friends they mostly said this 
was due to “ rudeness ” or “unacceptable behavior” 
whereas restricting friends was based on trust in 
commenting on pictures or wall posts. Namibians also 
used language switching as a way of restricting friends , 
which contrasted to the Spanish speaking American .  
American participants periodically remove friends if 
they have not spoken in a long time or gain no value in 
their updates. However, they do not block or restrict 
views. This echoes Wang et al. ’s findings that 
Americans had the least desire to restrict users [11 ], 
but contrary to their interpretation of this, we found 
participants indicated that they find it too complicated 
to decide on whether to restrict views and simply 
remove the friends if they have to restrict their views of 
certain friends.  
Self-Presentation and photo sharing 
Namibians mostly share pictures featuring themselves. 
Often they are the main focus of the picture with very 
little surroundings shown, even when they share 
pictures of their village settings. One participant 
responded that one of the activities that has changed 
since joining is that he poses for Facebook pictures to 
upload. Friends usually comment on the poster’s 
physical appearance in the picture, which suggests that 
we cannot be limited about thinking only how people 
present themselves online, but realize that the 
presentation of "self" is not governed solely by a user's 
own direct manipulation of their profile. Rather things that others say about us may be more compelling than 
things we say about ourselves.  
This finding is consistent with Zhao and Jiang’s study 
that Chinese users, who are considered highly 
collectivistic, tend to show “polished” images of 
themselves while Americans tend to prefer group 
pictures [13]. Presentation may take the form of "See 
me first and foremost in the context of my group"; but 
such identity performance does not necessarily imply a 
collectivist approach to personhood [ 14]. Like Wang et 
al. [11], we speculate that this contradictory 
collectivism-individualism paradigm could be attributed 
to collectivistic cultures’ desire to project a good ima ge 
and status to social groups.  
Privacy of births, death, religion and politics 
Namibians share their religious and political views on 
Facebook as well as post about death, which is 
considered private and taboo by Americans. This 
finding is contradictory to Nadkarni and Hofmann’s 
hypothesis that individualistic cultures will share their 
private information and discuss potentially controversial 
topics with their Facebook friends [8 ]. 
Since American participants use Facebook as a 
professional network they indicate that they consider 
what to post and avoid religion and politics. Two 
participants indicated that they posted about politics 
before and will not so do again based on co mments 
received. One participant indicated that she “did not 
want to jeopardize he r husband’s career through their 
joint Facebook friendships” by posting about politics or 
controversial topics.  
Namibian participants not only share religious thoughts 
openly and frequently, but they also subscribe to 
religious updates such as the daily v erse or “On this 
Work-in-Progress
CHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA
2606day, God wants you to know”. However, most of them 
equally subscribe to the daily horoscope, which reflects 
the Namibian culture that although 85% of Namibians 
are Christians, Christianity co-exists with traditional 
beliefs and practices [1 ]. 
Death 
Literature reveals memorial walls and ongoing posting 
seem to have become the norm on Facebook with 
many writings on the topic and a session dedicated at 
CHI 2011 [5] . However, American participants indicated 
that they do not show grief, as this is considered 
private. They also do not share sad news on Facebook 
as Facebook is a “happy space” and one should share 
only happy and positive news. Two participants also 
indicated that sharing about death on Facebook is like 
“emotional support seeking ” and they do not seek 
emotional support. Although 70% of American 
participants had not experienced death of a person 
known to them, they have all seen memorial walls. 
In contrast, while only 10% of local Namibians and 
20% of expatriate Namibians have encountered 
memorial walls, they do post and share about death in 
their own posts and comments frequently. Namibian 
participants encountered death regularly due to 
HIV/AIDS , traffic accidents or violence, and mourning 
and funerals are a lengthy communal activity. 
Namibians indicated that Facebook has become a cheap 
and fast way to distribute death notifications and pass 
on condolences to console family members. However, 
they indicated that they would write on the walls of the 
living family members as opposed to the deceased’s 
wall or memorial page. General privacy concerns 
Like Strater and Lipford’s [9 ] we found, across all three 
groups, that people rarely update privacy settings 
although all three groups get privacy notifications via 
reposts of friends or Facebook official notifications. 
However, contrary to previous studies [11], we did not 
find Americans to be more concerned about privacy, 
rather Namibians indicated that they and their 
communities were more concerned about keeping 
information safe or hiding one’s affairs. Americans 
indicated that nothing is really private on the Internet 
and their home communities are fairly open about 
issues. One Namibian lamented that Facebook 
somewhat changed their privacy perceptions as it 
dictates what to do and thus they reveal more of 
themselves; such as sharing thoughts and actions . 
Through its rigid overarching structure and uniform 
style and presentation, Facebook itself seems to 
reassert monoculture and dissuade an appreciation of 
difference.  
Conclusion 
Our online survey method excluded many interested 
Namibians who accessed Facebook only via non-smart 
cellphones and had no access to an Internet enabled 
device, also no white Namibians were included . Along 
with our snowball sampling method, it created a sample 
bias, such that we interviewed Namibians in similar 
career fields, similar education levels, similar access to 
technology and in urban settings.  
We think that the differences found despite no 
significant difference in collectivistic orientation may be 
important in several ways. Firstly, the contradictions in 
the collectivism-individualism paradigm replicate the 
problems that HCI encounters with all social 
psychological models of cultural difference [7 ]. 
Work-in-Progress
CHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA
2607Secondly, differences do show that Namibians 
appropriate the representation of social connections 
offered by Facebook. However, thirdly, our data 
suggests that Facebook contributes to changing views 
of social constructs.  
The status of online spaces remains as ambiguous, 
problematic and in need of regular and ongoing 
analysis as traditional offline spaces. It is, of course, 
impossible to consider one without the other. 
Thus, our future work extends our qualitative methods 
to include ethnography and focus groups, to 
complement the quantitative survey tools and analysis 
models applied to national culture. We will also 
interview Namibians and Americans who have restricted 
Internet access and who have not been exposed to 
Facebook for such a long period as the current sample.  
References 
[1] Bidwell, N., Winschiers-Theophilus, H., Koch-
Kapuire, G. and Chivuno-Kuria, S. Situated interactions 
between audiovisual media and African herbal lore. 
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing  15, 6 ( 2011),  609–
627. 
[2] Bidwell, N. Ubuntu in the network: Humanness in 
social capital in rural South Africa. Interactions 17, 2  
(2010),  68-71 
[3] Danah, D. White flight in networked publics? How 
race and class shaped American teen engagement with 
MySpace and Facebook [draft]. In Digital Race 
Anthology , ed. Lisa Nakamura and Peter Chow-White. 
2010. Routledge Press [forthcoming].  
[4] Facebook Fact Sheet . 
http://newsroom.fb.com/content/default.aspx?NewsAre
aId=22   [5] Getty, E., Cobb, J., Gabeler, M., Nelson, C., Weng, 
E., and Hancock, J. I said your name in an empty 
room: Grieving and continuing bonds on Facebook. In 
Proc. CHI 2011 , ACM Press (2011), 997- 1000. 
[6] Hofstede. G. http://geert-hofstede.com/united-
states.html   
[7] Irani, L., Vertesi, J., Dourish, P., Philip, K., and 
Grinter, R. Postcolonial computing: A lens on design 
and development. In Proc. CHI 2010,  ACM Press 
(2010). 1311- 1320.  
[8] Nadkarni, A. and Hofmann, S. Why do people use 
Facebook? Personality and Individual Differences 52   
(2012), 243- 249. 
[9] Strater, K. and Lipford, H. Strategies and struggles 
with privacy in an online social networking community. 
In Proc. BCS HCI (1), (2008), 111- 119. 
[10]  Wagner, J. Studies of Individualism-
Collectivism: Effects on cooperation in groups. 
Academy of Management Journal 3, 1  (1995), 152- 172. 
[11]  Wang, Y., Norcie, G. and Cranor, L. Who is 
concerned about what? A study of American, Chinese 
and Indian users’ privacy concerns on social network 
sites. In Proc. Trust 2011.  Vol. 6740, (2011), 146- 153. 
[12]  Winschiers, H. and Fendler, J., Assumptions 
considered harmful: The need to redefine usability. In 
Proc. USI- HCII’07 . Nuray Aykin (Ed.), 2007. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 452- 461. 
[13]  Zhao, C. and Gonglue, J. Cultural differences 
on visual self-presentation through social networking 
site profile images. In Proc. Chi 2011 , ACM Press 
(2011), 1129- 1132.  
[14]  Zhao, S., Grasmuck, S., and Martin, J. Identity 
construction on Facebook: Digital empowerment in 
anchored relationships. Computers in Human Behaviour 
24, 5 (2008),  1816- 1836.  
 
Work-in-Progress
CHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA
2608