CHI 2020 Case Study
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAIterative Participatory Design for VRET 
Domain Transfer: From Combat 
Exposure to Military Sexual Trauma 
Sharon Mozgai 
USC Institute for Creative 
Technologies 
Los Angeles, CA 90094, USA 
mozgai@ict.usc.edu 
Arno Hartholt 
USC Institute for Creative 
Technologies 
Los Angeles, CA 90094, USA 
hartholt@ict.usc.edu 
Andrew Leeds 
USC Institute for Creative 
Technologies 
Los Angeles, CA 90094, USA 
leeds@ict.usc.edu 
Albert "Skip" Rizzo 
USC Institute for Creative 
Technologies 
Los Angeles, CA 90094, USA 
rizzo@ict.usc.edu 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 
CHI ’20 Extended Abstracts, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA. 
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6819-3/20/04. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3375219 Abstract 
This case study describes the expansion of the BRAVE-
MIND virtual reality exposure therapy (VRET) system from 
the domain of combat-related posttraumatic stress disor-
der (PTSD) to the domain of PTSD due to Military Sexual Trauma (MST). As VRET continues to demonstrate efﬁcacy 
in treating PTSD across multiple trauma types and anxiety 
disorders, adapting existing systems and content to new 
domains while simultaneously maintaining clinical integrity 
is becoming a high priority. To develop BRAVEMIND-MST we engaged in an iterative participatory design process with 
psychologists, engineers, and artists. This ﬁrst-person ac-
count of our collaborative development process focuses on 
three key areas (1) VR Environment, (2) User-Avatar State, 
and (3) Events, while detailing the challenges we encoun-
tered and lessons learned. This process culminated in eight design guidelines as a ﬁrst-step in deﬁning a VRET domain 
transfer methodology. 
Author Keywords 
Virtual Reality; Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy; Posttrau-
matic Stress Disorder; Military Sexual Trauma 
CCS Concepts 
•Human-centered computing → HCI design and evalua-
tion methods; Virtual reality; 
CS22, Page 1CHI 2020 Case Study
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAIntroduction 
An emerging area of human-computer interaction research 
and development is the clinical use of virtual reality (VR) 
simulation technology for the treatment of posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD). Among the many evidence-based 
approaches used to treat PTSD, prolonged exposure ther-
apy (PE) has signiﬁcant empirical support for its therapeu-
tic efﬁcacy [11]. PE is a form of traditional psychotherapy 
that typically involves the graded and imaginal reliving and 
narrative recounting of a traumatic event. However, many patients are unwilling or unable to effectively visualize trau-
matic events, which can result in treatment failure [1]. Vir-
tual reality exposure therapy (VRET) offers a way to cir-cumvent these natural avoidance tendencies by directly 
delivering multi-sensory and context-relevant scenes and 
cues to aid in the retrieval, confrontation, and processing of traumatic experiences. 
BRAVEMIND, a clinical, interactive VRET tool we devel-
oped, is currently being used to asses and treat PTSD in returning Operation Enduring Freedom/Operation Iraqi 
Freedom military personnel [9]. This VRET system enables 
clinicians to gradually immerse patients into naturalistic 
environments representative of their traumatic events in a 
controlled, stepwise fashion. Interest in using BRAVEMIND technology to deliver exposure therapy has grown in recent years as positive outcomes, including clinically and statisti-
cally signiﬁcant reductions in PTSD symptoms, have been 
reported [5][3][10]. As VRET continues to demonstrate efﬁ-
cacy in treating PTSD across multiple trauma types [2][11] 
and even across multiple anxiety disorders [6][7], an in-creased need is arising for efﬁcient, cost-effective method-
ologies to adapt existing systems and content to new do-
mains, while simultaneously maintaining clinical integrity. 
There is particular interest in exploring the use of VRET to treat military sexual trauma (MST). It is estimated that 
13.9% of service members and veterans report sexual as-sault, however exact prevalence rates are difﬁcult to gauge 
as many survivors do not report due to stigma or fear of 
reprisal [12]. Moreover, MST experienced as either a threat 
or as an assault within a military context, can produce addi-
tional risk for the development of PTSD in a population that 
is already at risk. The high incidence of MST is an issue 
of signiﬁcant concern to the Department of Defense and 
resources have been aimed at prevention and treatment [8]. 
Adjacent to these efforts, the U.S. Army has funded the 
expansion of the BRAVEMIND system to speciﬁcally ad-
dress MST -related PTSD. An initial feasibility study of this new BRAVEMIND-MST system suggests that VRET can be 
safely implemented in the treatment of MST -related PTSD 
and there is also promising evidence that it may be effective in reducing symptoms of both PTSD and depression for this 
population [4]. 
In this case study, we will provide our ﬁrst-person account 
of expanding the BRAVEMIND system from a combat con-
text to a MST context by exploring our participatory design 
process and detailing lessons learned. We will share future directions for our work and conclude with eight guidelines 
distilled through this expansion process as a ﬁrst-step at 
deﬁning a methodology for adapting VRET across domains. 
Methods 
Collaboration on BRAVEMIND-MST began in 2014, and the initial steps included the assembly of a multidisciplinary 
team comprised of the principal investigator, subject mat-
ter experts (SMEs), user experience designer, engineers, 
artists, and a producer. SMEs consisted of a team of three 
clinical psychologists who specialized in treating MST -
related PTSD and would provide feedback, not only on the 
CS22, Page 2CHI 2020 Case Study
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAcontent, but on the preferences and needs of the intended 
end users (i.e., clinicians). While the SMEs began reviewing case notes and conducting a comprehensive literature re-view to provide evidence for their design requests, the pro-ducer of the project identiﬁed a major hurdle that this multi-disciplinary team might have in executing the project: com-munication. Competing interests (e.g., time/resources vs. serving patients) and the differences in cognitive style and used-vocabulary of psychologists, engineers, and artists led to the establishment of a simple and speciﬁc team vo-cabulary for expressing desires regarding design elements of the BRAVEMIND-MST system. This hierarchical cate-gorization system sorted elements in three buckets: Must Have, Should Have, Could Have, which was used as an an-chor for conversation and decision making throughout the development process. 
Figure 1: The BRAVEMIND treatment environment presents 
stimuli in the VR head-mounted display, has directional 3D audio, 
and vibrotactile, and olfactory stimuli can be delivered. Clients’ experiences of VR scenarios and stimuli are controlled by a clinician in real time via a separate ‘Wizard of Oz’ (WoZ) interface, while in full audio contact with the client during exposure. 
Figure 2: The clinician interface enables the adjustment of: 1) 
Time of Day, 2) Looping sounds (e.g., breathing, shower), 3) Events (e.g., doors open or close, lights on or off), and 4) Environment areas (e.g., scenes: FOB, US town bar). 
BRAVEMIND-MST is based on the original hardware and 
software of the deployed BRAVEMIND system (see Figure 1), but signiﬁcant consideration was necessary to meet the speciﬁc requirements of VRET for MST. We will focus on three development areas (1) VR Environments, (2) User-Avatar State and, (3) Events. It is important to note that the goal of BRAVEMIND-MST is not to recreate assault in VR, but instead to provide therapists with a tool to approx-imate individual survivor narratives to trigger memories as a basis for PE. Each survivor has their own story and within BRAVEMIND-MST, the clinician can mix-and-match various content elements to support a speciﬁc narrative through a specially designed control interface (see Figure 2). 
VR Environments 
Every environment in BRAVEMIND-MST is meant to serve a range of individual, unique narratives. As such, these en-vironments are not designed to map perfectly to an indi-
CS22, Page 3CHI 2020 Case Study
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAvidual trauma, but instead are designed to be more ﬂexi-
ble, adaptive, and reminiscent of common environments in 
which the traumatic event may have occurred. 
It was the initial desire of the development team to reuse 
existing environments from the BRAVEMIND system. How-
ever, all existing content was focused on Iraq and Afghanistan, 
while in reality many MST assaults also happen domes-
tically. With the input of the SMEs, the team decided to 
reuse one existing environment, the Forward Operating 
Base (FOB), where service members eat, sleep, and spend 
time together and develop one new environment to repre-
sent the United States. Though the FOB environment could be ported, it did need to be modiﬁed to create more intimate 
spaces. To achieve this, the artists (1) increased the set 
dressing (e.g., dufﬂe bags, gear, cups), (2) added to exist-
ing areas (e.g., ofﬁce added to storage building), and (3) 
created new areas (e.g., tent barracks, lavatories). 
In addition to the FOB, completely new environments were 
discussed amongst the team members and the Must-Should-
Could system was employed in the decision-making pro-
cess (see Figure 3). In the end, one new environment was developed for BRAVEMIND-MST, a small US town. Here 
the artists were able to re-use assets from the original sys-
tem and created new assets where needed. Environments 
in this US town included a bar exterior, alleyway, empty lot, 
strip mall, motel exterior, motel bedroom/bathroom, apart-ment, ofﬁce, women’s/men’s bathroom, and car ride (civilian 
or taxi). 
An important collaborative addition to all VR environments 
focused on lighting. The SMEs on the project pointed out 
that many assaults happen at night or in closed dark spaces 
during the day. Transitions from light to dark were consid-ered integral to the environment. Real-time lighting also 
adds the ability to cast shadows of both the patient and 
Figure 3: Discussions regarding design choices were anchored 
with the Must-Should-Could system used by our multidisciplinary 
team. Clinician review of design intentions above where 1=Must 
2=Should 3=Could. 
the aggressor, which may be relevant to a speciﬁc narra-
tive. Therefore, real-time dynamic lighting was added to 
give clinicians control of the lights going on and off in small 
spaces (e.g., bathroom, barracks). 
User-Avatar State 
User-Avatar state refers to user position and orientation 
within a VR environment. The original BRAVEMIND had 
two User-Avatar states: walking and sitting in a vehicle. 
CS22, Page 4CHI 2020 Case Study
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAThese two states represent common activities in Iraq and 
Afghanistan. Originally, we meant to re-use these two User-
Avatar states in BRAVEMIND-MST without modiﬁcation. 
The development team provided an initial set of storyboards to the SMEs for review depicting the user in these two states 
only. Early feedback from the clinicians was quick and 
clear; these two states would not be sufﬁcient to capture 
the experience of their patients. Sitting and standing did not 
capture all of the salient elements necessary to trigger trau-matic memories of MST and having only these two options 
could potentially take the user out of the immersive experi-
ence. 
To address this feedback, the artists went back to the draw-
ing board and created an additional storyboard focused 
on a third User-Avatar state: lying down (see Figure 4). 
SMEs reviewed all new storyboards and provided additional 
feedback related to mobility. In all other User-Avatar states, 
there is the possibility for the client to initiate movement via game controller. These movements are limited (e.g., walk-
ing), but do allow for some user agency. The team made 
the decision to remove agency from the lying down position 
however, to evoke feelings of helplessness and disorienta-
tion within the VRET session. 
Events 
Within the BRAVEMIND-MST environment, the clinician 
can trigger stimuli (e.g., breathing of a perpetrator) via a separate “Wizard of Oz”-type clinician interface. We re-
fer to the triggering of these stimuli as events. In BRAVE-
MIND for combat–related PTSD, the focus was on recre-ating triggering stimuli commonly experienced in Iraq and 
Afghanistan. These events included RPG Ambush, Vehicle 
ﬂips, smoke and ﬁres. In transitioning contexts from warfare to MST, the events changed from large-scale and mechan-
ical to up-close and personal. This includes the addition of 
Figure 4: In addition to sitting and standing, team artists delivered 
a new User-Avatar state, lying down, via storyboard for 
BRAVEMIND-MST clinicians to review prior to prototyping. 
doors, lights, and presence of an aggressor in the scene. 
The system does not attempt to recreate a sexual assault 
but rather, attempts to match context and triggering events, 
including speciﬁc sounds and lighting changes, that the pa-tient describes in accordance with the established protocol 
of PE. 
Within this more intimate context, a reconﬁguration of the 
clinician interface was needed from the original BRAVE-
MIND design. Clinicians are focusing on multiple tasks 
during a typical VRET session, including setting up the virtual environment, matching the narrative as they lead 
their patient through PE, and vigilantly monitoring the pa-
tient throughout the session. Therefore, ease of use is 
paramount to avoid issues of cognitive load and distraction. 
In the MST context, the clinicians required more options 
to change the setting details, including open and closed 
doors, lights on or off, looping sounds such as the shower 
or breathing and single sounds, for example a cell phone ringing or pants zipping. Organization of this new interface 
was developed though an iterative process of trial and error 
with feedback from clinicians working through mock ses-
sions (see Figure 2). 
CS22, Page 5CHI 2020 Case Study
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USATable 1: BRAVEMIND Original vs. MST Comparison 
BRAVEMIND BRAVEMIND-MST 
User-Avatar States 
Walking Walking 
Driving Driving (passenger only) 
(driver or passenger) Lying Down (in any bed) 
Environments (selection) 
Afghanistan FOB Afghanistan FOB with added: 
Afghanistan Safe Zone Tent Barracks 
Aghanistan Rural Village Ofﬁce 
Bagram Air Base Shower Trailer 
Afganistan Market USA Town with: 
Iraq City Bar Exterior 
Iraq Market Alleyway 
Iraq Checkpoint Motel Interior-Exterior 
Iraq Palm Grove Strip Mall 
Iraq Residential Areas Generic Ofﬁce 
Events (selection) 
Call-to-prayer, Breathing, TV, 
crowds, etc. shower, etc. 
Weather Effects Doors Open/Closed 
IED Explosions Lights On/Off 
Ambushes Aggressor 
Vehicle Flip Present/Hidden 
Aircraft Flyovers Aggressor 
Findings 
The iterative participatory design process worked well in 
adapting the environments and content from the original 
system and in developing a functional prototype ready for 
testing (see Table 1, for summary). 
An initial feasibility study of BRAVEMIND-MST by Loucks et al. (2019) examined the use of this system in treatment. 
Participants included 15 veterans (26% male) with MST -
related PTSD. Assessment of PTSD, depression, and psy-chophysiological indicators of distress occurred at pre-
treatment, post-treatment, and 3-month follow-up. Treat-
ment followed a typical course of VRET and lasted 6–12 
sessions. 
The percentage of participants meeting PTSD criteria con-
tinued to decline between post-treatment assessment (53%) 
and follow-up (33%) with signiﬁcant reductions in pre- to 
post-treatment PTSD (CAPS severity: t(10) = 3.69, p = 
.004; PCL-5: t (10) = 3.79, p = .004) and depressive symp-
toms, (PHQ-9: t(8) = 2.83, p = .022), which were main-
tained at follow-up. There also was a signiﬁcant pre- to post-treatment reduction in heart rate response to a trauma 
cue. Findings of this study also indicated that VRET can 
be safely delivered and is a promising treatment for MST -related PTSD [4]. 
One interesting outcome was the choice by clinicians in 
this feasibility study to not utilize the presence of an ag-gressor in the virtual environment. The aggressor was de-
veloped with input from the SMEs to have (1) two possible 
genders, (2) three possible skin tones, (3) three possible uniforms representing different branches of the military or 
civilian clothing, and (4) three versions of build type, culmi-
nating in 72 possible embodiments. The intent was to cover a wide-range of possible aggressor archetypes that could 
be present in the environment, but never for the aggres-
sor to initiate an attack. For example, the aggressor could be placed at relevant positions (e.g., in a doorway block-
ing an exit, next to a bed, or driving a car) or the aggressor 
could follow the user around dynamically in any of the en-
vironments. Substantial time was spent on development of 
the aggressor with the SMEs, but when the clinicians ac-
CS22, Page 6CHI 2020 Case Study
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAtually experienced the aggressor in the VR environment, 
it was deemed too evocative for the initial feasibility study 
and was omitted from the VRET experience. As content 
was reviewed during the development phase by clinicians remotely in video format, a major lesson learned is that only 
one aggressor character should have been developed prior 
to initial review, and that initial review should have occured 
in VR rather than in 2D video format. 
Discussion 
As with any development project, our project had a number 
of limitations. To begin with, the number of clinicians par-
ticipating in the design was three. Future iterations of this 
project should include the voices of additional clinicians to 
review the system and provide feedback for optimization. 
Additionally, we only included one end user group in the de-
velopment of BRAVEMIND-MST: clinicians. The next phase of development will include the feedback of survivors of 
MST in our iterative participatory process. 
There is much left to explore in the domain of VRET for 
MST. The VR MST -speciﬁc stimulus content built into the 
BRAVEMIND VR exposure system was designed and de-
veloped leveraging expert clinician feedback and existing 
literature, but additional testing needs to be conducted 
to vet these choices in order to best meet the treatment needs of this population. The initial feasibility results are 
promising, but its impact is limited by its small sample size. 
Future evaluations of the system should include a mixed-
methodologies approach including continued user-testing, 
ﬁeld observations, and empirical studies. Finally, our work 
focuses on a military audience; however, PTSD is pervasive in the general population as well. Future development and 
testing should focus on delivering this treatment option to 
the civilian population. Conclusion 
As VRET continues to demonstrate treatment efﬁcacy and patients with PTSD continue to deem VRET an accept-
able and attractive treatment option [3] VRET will expand 
into multiple domains of PTSD with varying causes and 
target populations. The needs of each of these domains 
are tremendously speciﬁc. Optimizing treatment requires 
the careful development of target speciﬁc environments 
and stimuli. This paper’s contributions can be summarized 
with the following set of eight design guidelines to transition 
VRET development across domains: 
1. Identify and engage all end users as early as possible 
to participate in the design process. 
2. Anchor multidisciplinary conversations with a simple 
and shared vocabulary (e.g., Must/Should/Could). 
3. Deﬁne the scale of events relevant for clinically suc-
cessful PE within the domain (e.g., large scale [explo-
sion] and/or small scale [door shutting]). 
4. Deﬁne level of agency of end users (i.e., clinicians 
and patients) in VR environment. 
5. Deﬁne possible User-Avatar states based on patient’s 
level of agency and clinically relevant triggers. 
6. Design clinician interface based on scale, level of 
agency, and ease of use to reduce clinician task load. 
7. Conduct initial feasibility tests to determine that the 
VRET system can be safely and effectively deployed in the domain. 
8. Iterate based on end user feedback. 
CS22, Page 7CHI 2020 Case Study
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAAcknowledgments 
We thank all the volunteers, and all publications support 
and staff, who wrote and provided helpful comments on 
previous versions of this document and our partners at 
Emory and Cornell University. Authors Sharon Mozgai, 
Arno Hartholt, Andrew Leeds and Skip Rizzo gratefully ac-
knowledge the grant from TATRC (W81XWH-14-C-0091) 
that funded this work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J Difede, H Hoffman, and N Jaysinghe. 2002. 
Multimedia Reviews: Innovative Use of Virtual Reality 
Technology in the Treatment of PTSD in the Aftermath 
of September 11. Psychiatric services 53, 9 (2002), 
1083–1085. 
[2] J et al. Difede. 2007. Virtual reality exposure therapy 
for the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder 
following September 11, 2001. Journal of Clinical 
Psychiatry 68, 11 (2007), 1639–1647. 
[3] Greg Reger et al. 2016. Randomized controlled trial of 
prolonged exposure using imaginal exposure vs. virtual reality exposure in active duty soldiers with deployment-related posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD). Journal of consulting and clinical psychology 
84, 11 (2016), 946. 
[4] L et al Loucks. 2019. Y ou can do that?!: Feasibility of 
virtual reality exposure therapy in the treatment of 
PTSD due to military sexual trauma. Journal of anxiety 
disorders 61 (2019), 55–63. 
[5] RN McLay, A Baird, J Webb-Murphy, W Deal, L Tran, 
H Anson, W Klam, and S Johnston. 2017. A 
randomized, head-to-head study of virtual reality 
exposure therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 20, 
4 (2017), 218–224. [6] D Opri¸ s, S Pintea, A García-Palacios, C Botella, S ¸ 
Szamosközi, and D David. 2012. Virtual reality exposure therapy in anxiety disorders: a quantitative meta-analysis. Depression and anxiety 29, 2 (2012), 
85–93. 
[7] MB Powers and PMG Emmelkamp. 2008. Virtual 
reality exposure therapy for anxiety disorders: A 
meta-analysis. Journal of anxiety disorders 22, 3 
(2008), 561–569. 
[8] Samuel L Preston. 2018. Veterans affairs and 
department of defense integrated systems of mental 
health care. In Military and Veteran Mental Health. 
Springer, 97–115. 
[9] Difede Rizzo, A and Rothbaum. 2010. Development 
and early evaluation of the Virtual Iraq/Afghanistan 
exposure therapy system for combat-related PTSD. 
Annals of the New Y ork Academy of Sciences 1208, 1 
(2010), 114–125. 
[10] B Rothbaum. 2014. A randomized, double-blind 
evaluation of D-cycloserine or alprazolam combined 
with virtual reality exposure therapy for posttraumatic 
stress disorder in Iraq and Afghanistan War veterans. 
American Journal of Psychiatry 171, 6 (2014), 
640–648. 
[11] BO Rothbaum, LF Hodges, D Ready, K Graap, and 
RD Alarcon. 2001. Virtual reality exposure therapy for Vietnam veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. 
The Journal of clinical psychiatry (2001). 
[12] LC Wilson. 2018. The prevalence of military sexual 
trauma: A meta-analysis. Trauma, Violence, & Abuse 
19, 5 (2018), 584–597. 
CS22, Page 8