CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA"And This, Kids, Is How I Met Your Mother": Consumerist, 
Mundane, and Uncanny Futures with Sex Robots 
Giovanni Maria Troiano Matthew Wood Casper Harteveld 
Northeastern University Newcastle University Northeastern University 
CAMD Open Lab CAMD 
Boston, MA Newcastle upon Tyne, UK Boston, MA 
g.troiano@northeastern.edu m.wood8@ncl.ac.uk c.harteveld@northeastern.edu 
ABSTRACT 
Sex Robots are no longer science ﬁction and may soon be-
come widespread. While much discussion has developed in 
academia on their moral and social impact, sex robots have 
yet to be examined from a critical design perspective and are 
under-explored in HCI. We use the Story Completion Method 
(SCM) to explore commonplace assumptions around futures 
with sex robots and discuss those from a critical design per -
spective. Thirty ﬁve participants completed a story stem of a human encountering a sex robot or vice-versa. Through 
thematic analysis, we show narratives of consumerist relation-
ships between humans and sex robots, stories that describe 
sex robots as highly-efﬁcient sex workers that (out)perform 
humans in routinal sex activities, and narratives that explore 
sex robots as empathetic and sentient beings. Our participant-
created stories both reinforce and challenge established norms 
of sex robots and raise questions that concern responsible de-
sign and ethics in HCI. Finally, we show opportunities and 
limitations of using multiple-perspective story stems in SCM. 
CCS Concepts 
•Human-centered computing → Human computer inter-
action (HCI); •Social and professional topics → Sexual ori-
entation; 
Author Keywords 
Sex robots, human-robot interaction, sexual HCI, speculative 
design, research ﬁction, story completion method, ethics 
INTRODUCTION 
Sex robots [97] are rapidly emerging [53, 2, 3, 4, 52], and 
outside HCI the topic is increasingly researched and discussed 
[54, 51, 145, 101, 121, 67]. At present, we see two main 
approaches towards sex robots. On the one hand, the industry 
of sex toys (e.g., RealdollTM), sees sex robots merely as an 
opportunity to provide their customers with technologically advanced sex dolls (e.g., [1]), and continues to develop sex 
robots in that light. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI ’20, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA. 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6708-0/20/04 ...$15.00. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376598 On the other hand, academia focuses on discussing sex robots 
from social [51], moral [103], ethical [33], and legal [135] 
perspectives, and considers the effect they may have on the 
future of human-human, as well as human-machine relation-
ships [148, 118, 101, 149, 104, 121, 51]. Such discussion is 
now involving several communities, including researchers of 
human-robot interaction (HRI) [138, 100, 120], social psy-chology [151, 78, 150, 128, 60], machine ethics [129, 8, 15, 33], gender informatics [96], and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) 
[158, 67, 33]. As evidence of the rapidly increasing interest to-
wards sex robots, a special issue of Robotics1 called Love and 
Sex with Robot2, brought together researchers from the above 
mentioned areas, to advance the intellectual and scientiﬁc dis-
cussion on sex robots. The topics covered by the special issue 
involve, among others, robot emotions [133], ethical and so-
cial challenges posed by interacting with sex robots [18, 14], 
intimacy with robots [60, 61, 162], robot appearance and their 
gender inference [156], and the use of sound synthesis for 
enhancing humanoid characteristics in sex robots [16]. 
Despite the growing interest and increasing calls to further 
research on sex robots [33], HCI has, to date, barely engaged 
with the topic [148]. The lack of participation HCI exhibits 
in research on sex robots is surprising, given the increasing 
attention demonstrated for sexual interfaces [148, 38, 166, 167, 
168, 9, 59, 89, 90]. Importantly, commonplace assumptions 
around sex robots have, to our knowledge, not been empirically 
examined within (nor outside) HCI. We examine these in the 
context of responsible design [76], critical design [12], and 
ethics [17, 68], and contribute a discussion of sex robots as a 
third-wave HCI phenomenon [30]. Also, we respond to calls 
from earlier work with sex robots, suggesting that “larger 
views about relationships and society, not just understandings 
of sex robots themselves, should be a matter for more research 
and thus frame future work on the ethics of sex robots” [138]. 
However, investigating sex robots presents challenges. First, 
the controversial nature of discourses around sex [29], and the 
substantial absence of ethical regulations [68], make investi-
gating such topics in HCI hard [168, 89, 38]. Second, previous 
HCI work that engaged with conceptual discourses on sex, sexual interfaces, and sexuality [38], have emphasized how 
rigid institutional opposition and heavy content limitations do 
not allow for research to advance in this area [5]. 
1https://www.mdpi.com/journal/robotics 
2http://loveandsexwithrobots.org/ 
Paper 471
Page 1CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USARecent research, however, showed how sensitive topics such as 
same-sex and different-sex inﬁdelity [44], heterosexual orgasm 
[70], and VR and pornography [168], could be investigated 
and discussed through the Story Completion Method (SCM) 
[93]. The SCM leverage on principles of research ﬁction [155, 
28, 24, 27, 25, 26, 23, 22] and speculative design [58, 165], 
to generate socially-constructed stories that serve as basis for 
building scientiﬁc discourses on the development of future 
technology [168]; it is a lightweight method that allows to 
gather qualitative data in studies that are often anonymous [82, 
168]. We follow earlier work on VR and pornography [168] 
and use the SCM to investigate commonplace assumptions 
around sex robots. Differently from [168] and similar to [140], 
we prompt our participants with two story stems and ask them 
to write their stories from either of two perspectives: (1) a 
human encountering and interacting with a sex robot, and (2) a 
sex robot encountering and interacting with a human. We use 
multi-perspective Story Completion Tasks (SCTs) inspired by 
previous work with vignettes [164, 144], which looked at the 
same situation from different perspectives [65]; as such, we let participants elicit views that focus on both users of technology 
(i.e., humans) and the technology itself (i.e., sex robots). 
We analyze 35 participant-generated stories via thematic anal-
ysis and consider the emerging themes both through the angle 
of design in HCI (e.g., [147, 119]) and social-constructionism 
(e.g., [93]). Our participant-generated stories are an opportu-
nity to both engage HCI with research on sex robots (beyond 
sex dolls [148]), and contribute ongoing research and discus-
sion on sex robots from an HCI standpoint. By analysing our 
participant-generated stories, we show socially-constructed 
notions of what interactions with sex robots "might be", and 
contribute the following to HCI and sex robots research: (1) a critical inquiry of sex robots in HCI based on speculative material, (2) a discussion of sex robots as a third-wave HCI phenomenon [30] pertaining critical and responsible design, 
and (3) the use of multiple-perspectives story stems in SCM. 
A BRIEF INTRO TO SEX ROBOTS 
Sex robots should be considered part of sexual HCI [9, 142, 
143, 168, 5, 59, 12, 10, 11]. Inherently, sex robots are intended 
for sexual interactions [149], but sometimes regarded as social 
robots too [7, 158, 74, 92, 37, 137, 98]. However, differently 
from other social robots, previous work argued that sex robots 
may not require complex AI because of their "intended" use 
[138]. Arguably, the precursors of sex robots are the sex dolls 
[64] (or real dolls [1, 77, 2, 78, 100]). It is not coincidental 
that among the ﬁrst to experiment with and commercialize sex robots is a company manufacturing realistic, life-like sex dolls, 
such as RealdollTM, which launched HarmonyX in Septem-
ber 2018 [49]. HarmonyX is a realistic-looking sex doll, but 
augmented with automated bodily movements and human-like 
speech [16, 36, 153, 116]. Current target buyers of real dolls 
and sex robots are mostly heterosexual male [148], while exist-
ing models reinforce the gender dichotomy male-female and 
their objectiﬁcation [72, 75, 79, 148]. By contrast, beyond 
consumistic visions of sex robots reinforced by the industry, 
intellectual discourses on the social impact of sex robots are 
developing and leading to counterpoised "dystopian-versus-utopian" views [79, 138, 51, 47, 130]. The ongoing debate shows how, from an intellectual standpoint, sex robots are 
more than simply objects of sexual interest [148, 57]. Hence, 
the emergence of ethical and moral dilemmas (i.e., "are we 
ready for sex robots?" [138], or "should we campaign against 
them?" [51]), call for further reﬂecting on the roles and im-
pacts that sex robots may have in our future society. 
Debate and Visions of Sex Robots 
Opinions about sex robots and their prospective impact on our society are contrasting. Snell provides a list of potential 
(negative) impacts of sex robots [141], describing dystopian 
futures where they create addiction, obsession, and even com-
promise human-human relationships (e.g., marriage). Su et al. [148] instead, propose that sex robots may be used for 
technologically-mediated sexual wellness, similar to existing 
sex toys [57]. Contrary to the idea of sex robots as more 
proﬁtable and "fancier" sex dolls [53], machine ethics [15] 
and affective computing [149] highlight the possibility that 
such robots could also be companions to humans, as long as 
they are designed to be emphatic and mirror human feelings 
[47]. However, Sullins [149] observes how "human sexual 
motivation beyond the purely physical is a very complex af-fair and may not be something that can be fully captured by 
robotics". In 2015 a Campaign Against Sex Robots (CASR) 
was launched [40, 115, 51, 94], which raised concern about fu-
tures scenarios where sex robots may be (1) possible means to 
reinforcing women and children pornographic objectiﬁcation, 
or (2) potentially encourage violent behaviors and exploita-
tion of (women) prostitution, or (3) be detrimental to human 
empathy. Levy [101], however, when discussing ethical as-
pects of sex robots as sex workers, highlights how deﬁning 
their use as "immoral" would be anomalous when considering, 
for instance, the widespread and socially accepted use of sex 
toys. However, the debate seems far from resolving, and more 
intellectual efforts are needed to understand the beneﬁts and 
pitfalls of sex robots. Perhaps, research that tries to envision 
the future of technology may help advance such discussion. 
Possible Futures with Sex Robots 
Previous work attempted to envision futures where humans 
engage in intimate relationships with sex robots and showed 
different perspectives. Sullins describes the future where hu-
man and sex robots engage in intimate relationships as "very 
strange" and "wild" [149]. Pope conjectures that sex robots 
may have the potential to represent the future of sex, and ex-
plained hot they may function as tools for humans to reﬂect on their own (sexual) nature [121]. Hauskeller [81] invokes 
the Promethean shame [114] to explain how sex robots can be 
means through which we can possibly acquire higher agency 
and control over our sexual bodies. Su et al. [148] surveyed 
current users’ relationships with sex dolls to anticipate futures 
intimacies with robots; they highlight how sex dolls represent 
more than just "sex tools" to their owners, and rather "provide 
fertile ground for embodied ﬁctions and care of the self". In this paper, we engage HCI with research on sex robots and 
through the SCM envision their future. We use the SCM to let 
participants speculate about possible futures with sex robots, 
and use their stories to advance the intellectual discussion on 
sex robots from an HCI and social-constructionist perspective. 
Paper 471
Page 2CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAMETHOD 
We explore commonplace assumptions around sex robots us-
ing the SCM [93], recruiting participants among communities 
of ﬂuent English writers (e.g., "Fantasy Writers" on Reddit), 
which was indicated as an effective strategy in previous SCM 
studies [43, 45]. Next, we provide background on the SCM, 
explain how we designed our Story Completion Tasks (STCs), 
and how we analyzed the participant-created stories. 
The Story Completion Method 
The SCM is often used for qualitative studies in psychother -
apy [140] and developmental psychology [122]. Recently, 
Wood et al. [168] used the SCM in HCI to investigate VR 
and Pornography. Their analysis identiﬁed heteronormativity 
and hegemonic masculinity as characterizing future visions of 
VR porn, and proposed an agenda of designing for eroticism 
as tactics for countering such normative scenarios in sexual 
HCI. Following Kitzinger and Powell [93], Wood et al. [168] 
recommend that the speculative stories created through a SCM 
study should be looked at from a social constructionist per-
spective [84], and advise for "rejecting the notion that these 
stories indicate any ‘real’ inner psychological state" [168]. 
As such, we analyze participant-created stories for their dis-
cursive achievements, and consider the stories as socially-
constructed notions of how futures with sex robots "might be". 
Hence, following the advice of Wood et al. [168], we do not 
claim that our participant-created stories may represent "real" 
futures, or that they may actually be substantiated in reality, 
and consider our stories as data to align with previous SCM 
studies [168, 82]. We analyze our data from both an HCI and 
a social-constructionist perspective, considering how partici-
pants (1) conjectured about design features of sex robots (e.g., 
the user experience, the usability, the interface design) and (2) 
described sex robots as social entities (e.g., how they interact 
with humans and how humans interact with them, social and 
ethical implications). Next, we describe the SCTs that we used 
to explore commonplace assumptions around sex robots. 
Story Completion Tasks and Participants 
The study was approved by both the International Review 
Board (IRB) at Northeastern University, College of Arts, Me-
dia, and Design, and the Newcastle University Faculty of 
Science, Agriculture Engineering ethics committee. As said 
above, we targeted writers ﬂuent in English to generate longer 
and more detailed stories, which previous work [44, 70, 167] 
highlighted as important in generating an adequate dataset in 
SCM studies. We collected the stories on a protected Qualtrics 
server and kept participants’ identities anonymous. Upon click-
ing the survey link, participants were ﬁrst introduced to the 
purpose of the study. Then, they were asked to provide their 
age and asked for consent; people younger than 18 years were 
not allowed to complete the SCT and automatically redirected 
to a web-page thanking them for their interest in the study. 
After giving consent, participants were randomly assigned to 
either of the two following SCTs: 
"Morgan is about to have an encounter with a Sex Robot... 
What happens next? Please write from Morgan’s perspective and spend 
around 10-15 minutes to complete your story" 
[or] 
Please write from the Sex Robot’s perspective and 
spend around 10-15 minutes to complete your story" 
In either of the two SCTs, participants were presented with a large dialogue box, where they could write their specula-
tive stories; we recommended our participants to write a story 
of at least 100 words, but did not set a minimum or a max-imum length. However, differently from the work of Wood 
et al. on VR and Pornography [168], we did not specify a 
gender for either Morgan or the sex robot, but rather let par -
ticipants attribute a gender to those, as well as decide whether 
their encounter was the ﬁrst one or a series of many. We left 
such detail deliberately ambiguous, as we were interested in 
socially-constructed notions of humans interacting with sex 
robots that may reﬂect novelty and excitement [168], but that 
would also describe routines and mundane experiences [111]. 
After completing their stories, participants were asked to pro-
vide their age, gender, sexual orientation, nationality, and rela-
tionship status. Here, however, we report only age and gender, 
to align with how demographics were reported in previous 
SCM studies [168]. Participants were roughly split by gender, 
where 19 identiﬁed as male, 14 as female, and 2 as other (e.g., 
non-binary); their mean age was 33.8 (SD = 8.7). The majority 
of participants identiﬁed themselves as heterosexual (n = 26), 
White/Caucasian (n = 23), and non-disabled (n = 31). We 
analyzed the stories using thematic analysis, developing from 
lower-level codes to higher-level themes, following a social 
constructionist framework [44, 70, 93, 168]. Three authors 
performed a preliminary analysis in group and discussed the 
stories to identify emergent themes. Then, one author per -
formed a deeper analysis of the stories and consolidated three 
main themes, which were cross-checked with the other two authors in a ﬁnal round of analysis. Next, we describe the 
three main themes emerging from our analysis. 
RESULTS 
Participants generally wrote stories longer than the minimum 
100 words requested, with a mean length of 270 words. The 
shortest story was 24 words, while the longest was 756 words 
(SD = 162). To contextualise the quotations, we tag our data 
with participant IDs (i.e., M for stories from Morgan’s per -
spective, R for stories from the sex robot’s), gender, and age. 
Overall, the stories offered up an everyday, mundane relation-
ship which we examine in this analysis: 
Would it have been romantic? Would it be something 
mechanical? It was impossible to guess for me. I took a 
deep breath and ﬁnally met the robot. And this, kids, is 
how I met your mother. (M8, Male, 33) 
M8 presents us with our title quote, a humorous yet matter 
of fact scenario, suggesting the transformative role sex robots 
might hold in society. Likewise, R22 suggests a scenario 
where "you couldn’t tell the difference between them [sex 
robots] and humans" (R22, Male, 29) a scenario that Levy 
Paper 471
Page 3CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA[99] suggests, may not be long far. We found that participants 
made sense of this possible (everyday, mundane) future with 
sex robots through three distinct themes: (1) sex robots are a 
Commercialised Commodity, namely a highly commodiﬁed ex-
perience within a commercial sex robot setting; (2) human-sex 
robots interaction are an Efﬁcient Mundanity, where functional 
aspects are highlighted and sex robots seamlessly and efﬁ-
ciently deliver procedural sexual tasks for the purposes of (hu-
man) orgasm; (3) sex robot were characterised often through 
the guise of The Uncanny Valley, namely as performers of 
imitational, artiﬁcial human-like behaviors, yet nevertheless 
in potentially endearing terms. 
The Commercialised Commodity 
She walked into the neon-lit entrance of "Cyber Sen-sations", the ﬁrst and oldest of the Sex-Robot brothels. Greeting here were several android models of all the 
available sex-robot services one could order. (M3, Male, 
27) 
The encounter with sex robots was often made sense of in 
commercial settings and the “brothel” (M11, Male, 30), “robo-
brothel” (M3, Male, 27), or “robot brothel” (M10, Male, 46) 
was common to facilitate “a new form of high class prostitute” 
(M11, Male, 30). It is notable in the extract above that "Cyber 
Sensations" is “the ﬁrst and oldest” of these establishments, indicating a certain legacy and permanence in a presumably 
future society. M3 also indicates the sense of choice available 
to the sex robot consumer, as we will explore later. The “robo-brothel” space was characterised in a variety of ways which, as the “neon-lit entrance” in the above quote indicates, suggested 
an enticing, technological consumer environment: 
Within, the store continues the aesthetic he noted from 
the outside: sparse furniture and decoration, a small set 
of couches for patrons to sit and wait; a large ﬂat-screen 
display, showing a procedurally generated mixture of 
colours and shapes meant to be soothing, that also serves 
to conceal those sitting in the couches from being ob-served from the outside; and several racks on the wall, of various paraphernalia and over-the-counter medica-tions, that one might want to employ during ones visit. 
The place is as clean and welcoming as any shop selling 
consumer electronics. (M10, Male, 46) 
M10 earlier refers to the outside aesthetic of the “robot brothel” as “a kind of pop-up business that repairs and jailbreaks smart-
phones”. The details here are curious, and a far cry from the 
seedy, under-the-radar environments described in commercial 
sex environments [66]. The environment is painted as clin-
ical and minimalist, providing gentle anonymity (akin to a 
changing room, perhaps), displaying related products in a rou-
tinely ("as any") commercial setting. In another story, "they 
turned on some ‘sappy’ company mandated music” (R7, Male, 
27)—the "robo-brothel" is a standardised, consumer setting. 
It is notable that all explicit references to “brothels” were only 
made by male participants, perhaps reﬂective of malestream 
constructions of commercial sex [71]. Commercial sexual en-
vironments were nevertheless alluded to by some female and 
non-binary participants, yet were not explicitly called "broth-els". M9 (Female, 30), for instance, writes of a “hotel like 
building where the sex robots reside”: 
Morgan pays upfront at the reception. He could choose 
to use an automated service robot but prefers to meet a real person before meeting the sex robot. He gets a key 
card and takes a lift to the fourth ﬂoor where he ﬁnds his 
assigned room, 411. (M9, Female, 30) 
Whilst not explicitly called a brothel, the environment M9 
describes is clearly consumerist, following an implied trans-actional sequence. This is a monetary transaction ("Morgan 
pays"), which precedes the encounter ("upfront"), where Mor -
gan positioned as the client or customer is provided a service, 
complete with "key card" and an "assigned room". Consumer 
environments were also mentioned in other stories, with the sex robot “looking up from behind the counter” (R6, Non-
Binary, 28) in a sequence of dialogue, and Morgan being 
described as "a regular customer of the establishment” (R11, 
Female, 43). Morgan is often referred to as the "customer" or 
"client", situating the encounter as a trade of commerce. When 
money was mentioned in the stories, it was always prior to the 
encounter. Yet the circumstances in which this happened took 
two distinctly different forms: 
She comes around twice a month, sometimes more. For 
her is a relaxing activity, like a day in the spa... It was 
expensive but it was worth it! (R11, Female, 43) 
He enters the small room, puts in his coins and the ma-
chine buzzes into life. (R1, Female, 29) 
For R11, the encounter is a luxury experience, likened to a pampering. This bares resemblance to the quotes provided previously, the sex robot encounter is a planned visit to an "establishment" where Morgan is provided a service. This 
differs to R1, where the encounter draws parallel to a vending 
machine. The reference to "coins" implies a less luxurious 
experience, rather of an automated mechanistic service. Like-
wise, stories referred to "paying by the minute" (R2, Male, 
53) or Morgan "didn’t have enough money to afford his usual 
tastes" (R10, Female, 31). When framed as industry, this was 
on a spectrum from high level luxury treatment to automated, 
procedural, everyday encounters. The encounter was also 
framed in consumerist terms through the pretense of choice: 
There were the basic ’male’ and ’female’ shaped models 
and models of all other combinations of features, shapes, 
sizes, paint colours and textures and even extra sex-toy 
augmentations and AI functionality (M3, Male 27) 
Morgan chose a model and customized it. She was also 
given the chance to describe the experience she was after, 
to shape the AI accordingly. These thoughts help her 
calm down now, as she is about to meet the girl that she 
needs." (R9, Male, 35) 
Atlust have by this point rolled out hundreds of different 
designs of every shape and form to answer any users sexual desire. In 2087 they claimed they had made the 
ultimate product, and they would pair with it the ultimate 
AI, the mech hivemind. (R22, Male, 29) 
Paper 471
Page 4CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA"Basic" models were sometimes mandated by ﬁnancial means 
(see previous), but for those with the resources, a great deal of 
choice was available to Morgan as a client or customer. This 
is a customised world of "models" and "features", which R9 
describes as "height, weight, skin texture, hair, genitalia" (R9, 
Male, 35). The (high-end) commercial framing of the sce-
nario enables options of "all" combinations for the sex robot 
consumer, "to answer any users sexual desire". All the above 
stories identify AI capabilities in these terms. In M3’s story, 
AI is constructed as an optional "extra" in M3’s story that the 
client may add-on to their sex robot encounter, but for R9 
and R22 there is an imagined powerful AI driving the experi-
ence. While so far we have focused on individual, consumerist 
constructions of encounters with sex robots, there were also 
references to overarching constructions of a sex robot industry. 
R22 (continued from the above quotation) provided a lengthy 
plotted history to this imagined corporation: 
By 2080, they even formed a benevolent hivemind under 
the corporation who at this point manufactured the vast 
majority of the mechs, Atlas... This technology drew the 
fascination and wonder of the executive board of another 
major corporation of a far different Industry, PornHub...In 
the year 2082 the CEO of PornHub, Morgan Richards, 
brokered a deal to buy Atlas, and everyone knew it would 
quickly become their most lucrative division. They soon 
changed the name of Atlas to “Atlust”, and began chang-
ing everything, not just in the company, but the world...In 
2089 they rolled out this product line, naming it crudely 
the “Fuck-bot inﬁnite”. (R22, Male, 29) 
R22’s story is littered with references to big business, as a 
"major corporation" with an "executive board" where deals are 
"brokered" in "lucrative" business decisions. This story orien-
tates a sex robot future as a silicon-valley-style takeover, the 
outcome of which we will see at the end of our analysis. But 
for now, it is important to consider how a supposed sex robot 
industry is constructed through the lens of high-tech corpora-
tions. Elsewhere, we saw reference to reputation management, 
such as Morgan "awarding a 3 star review" (R3, Male, 28) or 
leaving a "review on BotAdvisor" (R4, Male, 62). The corpo-
rate framing of these encounters, therefore, indicated a whole 
commercial infrastructure imagined around the presence of 
sex robots. 
Consumerist approaches to sexuality can be criticised for being 
neoliberal, pandering to free-market capitalism and commodi-
fying sexual desire [73], and it is notable that such discourse 
was so readily available for our participants. Yet in the stories, 
such a "mix and match" approach also indicated a sense of 
sexual ﬂuidity: 
Morgan feels strange. He ﬁnd it interesting however he 
thought he was never interested in this type of transsex-
ual humans...The robot shifts again and the penis comes 
out the vagina. Then back to the vagina. Then penis 
again. Being undressed Morgan starts to touch his own 
penis. More the robot changes its genitals from female to 
male and back more he gets horny. While watching this 
transformation, Morgan masturbates himself. (R9, Male, 
35) This was earlier framed by R9 in consumerist terms, where he 
took time "to contemplate his new purchase" and "decide the 
right features: height, weight, skin texture, hair, genitalia". In 
the above quote, Morgan goes through a form of shift, at ﬁrst 
referring to the robot in pathologist terms ("transsexual") and 
feeling "strange", yet ultimately receiving sexual gratiﬁcation 
from this unusual morphing display of genitalia. While this story reinforces the gender binary [83], it nevertheless indi-
cates a form of post-human sexuality that might be reached 
through human-machine relationships. Such pushing of sexual boundaries was not common in our dataset, but such examples indicate a possible extension of sexual behaviour facilitated by machines (e.g., "’Do you like glow sticks?’. He nodded. *Now 
we’re getting somewhere.*" R6, Non-Binary, 28). We shall 
revisit these ideas in our ﬁnal theme, The Uncanny Valley. 
The Efﬁcient Mundanity 
I arrive at the property and send a signal to the client’s 
mobile app to indicate my presence. He arrives at the door 
almost immediately...He ushers me inside, but before I 
enter the property I conduct a security scan using facial 
and contextual recognition. I conﬁrm his identity, most 
importantly that he is of consenting age for sexual activity. 
His heart rate and breathing rate are elevated, but there is 
currently a less than 0.5 percent risk of a cardiac event, 
given his medical history. (R3, Male, 28) 
Sal awakens: she smells coffee. A few minutes ago her 
alarm clock, alerted by her restless rolling before waking, 
had quietly asked “coffee?”, and she had mumbled “yes.” 
“Yes” and “no” are the only words it knows. Sal looks 
out her windows at her neighborhood. Sunlight and a 
fence are visible through one, but through others she sees 
electronic trails that have been kept for her of neighbors’ 
coming and going during the early morning. Privacy conventions and practical data rates prevent displaying 
video footage, but time markers electronic tracks on the 
neighborhood map let Sal feel cozy in her street [160]. 
The story by R3, and the well-known story of Sal in Weiser’s 
vision of ubiquitous computing in "The Computer for the 
21st Century" [160] have remarkable similarities. Rogers 
[131] notes that in Weiser’s story, Sal’s needs are effortlessly 
met with digital technologies preempting a smooth, calm and 
efﬁcient user experience. Likewise, the tone of R3’s story is 
very similar, in indicating a seamless (home visit) encounter 
with a sex robot, efﬁciently managing the sexual encounter 
through digital technology. Rogers [131] also notes how Sal’s 
story raises ethical issues that need to be contended with in a vision of calm computing, namely the anonymised digital trails detailed in the above. In R3’s story these concerns are 
notably heightened, with "facial and contextual recognition" 
to conﬁrm his identity, and access to his full medical records. 
Nevertheless, here provided is a vision of "proactive comput-
ing" [152], where it is digital technologies which take initiative 
in providing an efﬁcient, "company-approved" service, also highlighted in R3’s story through the imperative ("most im-portantly") conﬁrmation that Morgan is of a consenting age. Many stories highlighted an adaptability of the sex robot to 
facilitate the user’s needs: 
Paper 471
Page 5CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAMorgan: I am going for a shower. . . . join me in a 
few minutes. . . . you can shower can’t you? OH, OF 
COURSE. . . (Load wet sex module) (R2, Male, 53) 
"Female" replies Morgan shyly. "OK then Morgan" the 
machine says this time in sultry female tones rather than 
the more neutral electronic voice (R1, Female, 29) 
Morgan matches with her ﬁrst client for the day, and the 
display lists his 3 demands: exotic, slow-build, moaning. 
She mounts the SensoMAX dildo that automatically ad-
justs to the client’s dimensions and begins. (M4, Female, 
24) 
R2 and R1 indicate a machine that is fully responsive to the 
needs of the user. The sex robot can "OF COURSE" join Mor -
gan for a shower (it just has to load the appropriate "module"), 
and immediately adjusts to facilitate its speaking patterns to facilitate Morgan’s request of a female character. In many 
ways, this reﬂects Roger’s proposed shift from "proactive com-
puting to proactive people" ([131], p. 406) to engage and 
enable people to do what they want or need. It is telling that in 
M4’s story, these are listed as "demands", which the machine 
dutifully responds to. The image presented is a device that 
adapts "automatically" to deliver on the user’s sexual "needs", 
an automated model adapting to users’ sexual desire. When 
the details of the sexual encounter were described explicitly, 
the model of efﬁciency can be compared to the four stage 
model of the "Sexual Response Cycle" popularised by sex re-
searchers Masters and Johnston [107], of excitement, plateau, 
orgasm, and resolution: 
Morgan and the sex robot lay down on the bed. They kiss 
and Morgan roams his hands on the robot’s body, feeling 
her under him. The robot starts stimulating Morgan’s pe-
nis but Morgan stops her, instead asking the robot to give 
him a blow job. Because Morgan has been expecting this 
encounter, he soon reaches orgasm. After taking a quick 
shower in the room’s bathroom, he comes back to the 
robot. ...Quite soon the sex robot starts to again stimulate 
Morgan’s penis and Morgan lays down, closes his eyes and enjoys that for a moment. Then he switches places 
with the sex robot, getting on top of her and entering her 
vagina. To him, the vagina feels very authentic. Morgan 
feels the robot’s vaginal muscles stimulating his penis and after a slow start, he begins to push more roughly, quickly inside the robot until he reaches his orgasm for 
a second time that evening. Collapsing on the robot, he 
feels relaxed and a lot less tense. He giggles a little, feel-
ing good. He looks at the clock and sees he still has time 
to get another quick shower before his time is up. He 
closes his eyes, giving himself a chance to simply enjoy 
the moment. (M9, Female, 30) 
In the above, we can see the encounter following a coital im-
perative script [109], which was mirrored across the stories: 
"Morgan chooses oral stimulation followed by vaginal inter -
course. This is the most common selection" (R3, Male, 28). 
Hence, many of the stories rendered "vaginal intercourse" as 
the prioritised objective of such heterosexual sex. In M9’s 
story above, a priority is given to the "authenticity" of the robot’s vagina, which in turn, legitimises this encounter. If 
the robot was deemed to be inauthentic, this raised questions 
about the legitimacy of the experience: "he wonders brieﬂy if 
this will count as masturbation or if he will still be technically 
a virgin afterwards" (M10, Male, 46) or "beckons the question 
of whether it could even be considered cheating" (M11, Male, 
30). 
Nevertheless, M9’s story clearly maps onto the aforemen-
tioned "Sexual Response Cycle" [107]. There is excitement, 
or initial arousal ("kiss", "roams his hands", "stimulates Mor -
gan’s penis", "a slow start"), plateau or full arousal ("push 
more roughly"), "orgasm", and resolution ("collapsing on the 
robot"). Interestingly, the resolution of the sex robot encounter 
often featured a "decontamination protocol" (R3, Male, 28) as 
an additional procedure to be delivered by an efﬁcient sexual 
service, for example: "A ﬂap opens on the machine and a wet 
wipe appears for Morgan to clean up" (R1, Female, 29). 
M9’s story in the above was arguably one of the most success-
ful, the only story explicitly featuring a multiple orgasm expe-
rience. While an element of "foreplay" sometimes featured in 
the stories, efﬁciency was often judged by how effectively sex 
robots delivered the "client", "customer", or user’s orgasm: 
I grab it, play with it, no need to fake or be complacent, no 
games, I feel silly talking to it but I do it just to see what 
it does, it is actually kind of distracting, I don’t really 
need to start a conversation, I get excited and undress to 
this robot, can’t ﬁnd the button to turn off the voice, I 
hurry up to ﬁnish and leave this room. (M7, Female, 42) 
I begin delivering the plot of our sexual encounter...Less 
than 10 seconds in, Morgan mutters "fast-forward", avoid-
ing eye contact. I proceed to complete the sexual tasks 
required. It takes a total of 7 minutes. (R3, Male, 28) 
It is noteworthy that orgasm is not explicitly mentioned in these stories, but implied: "hurry up to ﬁnish", "It takes a 
total of 7 minutes." These stories, therefore, rest on shared 
cultural assumptions that to "ﬁnish" is to achieve orgasm. In 
both stories, the importance of foreplay in accomplishing "It " 
is diminished, M7 identiﬁes there being no need for being 
"fake", playing "games" or to "start a conversation". Likewise, 
in R3’s story any "plot" is rendered unnecessary, rather the 
machine simply delivers "the sexual tasks required". 
These two stories also touch on how Morgan might interact 
with such a machine, such as pushing "the button" or "mutters 
’fast forward’". While most stories implied a form of voice 
interface, they also indicated ways of interacting with the machine on a technological level, e.g. "presses play" (M5, 
Male, 34), "Commandmode. Override" (R19, Male, 48). R3’s 
story in the above even indicated that you could "choose from 
the options list" rather than issuing "voice commands". All this indicates an economical delivery of a sexual service (to 
the "ﬁnish"): 
"Right, thinks the machine lets select the masturbation tube" and a black tube emerges from the machine and hangs over Morgan’s crotch...The machine gets going, 
sensors in the tube determine how things are progressing 
Paper 471
Page 6CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAand let the machine decide how stimulating it needs to 
be - in this case very. Lube squirts out from dispensers 
in the tube and the rotating, massaging structures in the 
tube start whirring...Eventually the machine senses that 
Morgan has come and the machine releases his cock from 
the tube (R1, Female, 29) 
"With the pre-encounter modules complete and the ex-ternal stimulus module fully booted, we initialize the 
encounter...the external stimulus device quietly begins its 
routine" (R5, Male, 32) 
Participants employed technological discourse in the delivery 
of the sexual "routine", with frequent mention of "sensors", to 
"determine how things are progressing" or "in order to provide 
a baseline" (R19, Male, 48). Elements of the sex robot were 
deﬁned as clinical apparatus to achieve the goal (of orgasm), 
such as R5’s references to "modules" and an "external stimulus 
device". Efﬁciency is put to the fore in R1’s story above, with 
a "tube" that "hangs over Morgan’s crotch", the emphasis here 
is the machine’s effective delivery of sexual stimulation, with 
"lube", "rotating", "massaging" and "whirring"—a procedural 
cascade of sexual stimulation which might be likened to a 
laundry machine. The overriding emphasis here was that the 
sex robot is a machine which could be programmed for (more) 
effective pleasure: 
It recognizes her facial features, and quickly reads up on 
the social and other media channels Morgan has given the robot permission to read. Here, it ﬁnds that she has 
watched the series of Pirates of the Caribbean movies 
recently. It cross references with her recent searches on 
google images, pinterest and a specialised manga pornsite 
she has an account at. (R19, Male, 48) 
I checked his recent net searches and changed my body 
shape, colour and hair for what he seemed to go for. So 
wanted it to be right. (R4, Male, 62) 
Here rested an assumption that through access to personal data, 
the sex robot could deliver a more effective experience, with 
participants often employing technological parlance, such as 
"cross references" or "machine learning algorithms based on 
our knowledge of Morgan’s sexual and pornographic prefer -
ences" (R3, Male, 28). These stories situate the sex robot as a machine in service of the user, with superior access to 
individuals psyche (through "searches" etc.). 
Two stories, written from the machine’s perspective wrote 
their stories as code, e.g. "UserInput: type = voice-command, 
text = ""kiss me"", conﬁdence = 0.93" (R15, Male, 22) and "PRECOITUS PROCEDURE INITIATED." (R21, Female, 30). As we shall explore in our ﬁnal theme, this hints at the 
potential mismatch between human sexuality and how sexual-
ity is imbued into a machine. However, this goes to reinforce 
the central notion of this theme—that sexual gratiﬁcation can 
be programmed, automated and delivered efﬁciently through 
sex robots, as advanced sexual delivery machines. 
The Uncanny Valley 
“She [the sex robot] turns out to be on the very sharp 
incline of the Uncanny Valley” (M10, M, 46) “The smell of her artiﬁcially perfumed hair, to match that 
of a human woman, a little too uncanny” (R10, F, 31). 
The Uncanny Valley was coined by robotics professor 
Masahiro Mori, a proposed state whereby afﬁnity towards a lifelike robot shifts to a sense of eeriness or revulsion as it 
approached lifelike attributes [113]. The existence of a deﬁn-
able "uncanny valley" has been questioned scientiﬁcally [91], 
and we do not argue that such a concept is "real", particularly 
since this paper uses a social constructionist lens. Rather, the 
"uncanny valley" is a culturally pertinent term [159], which 
as Devlin [55] notes, dates back to twentieth century psycho-
analysis. It was interesting to us that notions of the "uncanny" 
were drawn on implicitly and explicitly in the stories written 
by participants, and here we use it as a cultural term to make 
sense of our data. As M10 continues: 
Had she been sitting still, she would have been off-
putting, maybe looked like a corpse, but with movement 
she seems almost human. Her skin is perhaps too ﬂaw-less to seem real, her smile is certainly an imitation of a human smile but conveys warmth and welcome, her 
eyes might as well have been real, her hair has never had 
a bad-hair-day. This disconnect, this unreality is what 
allows him to go through with it all (M10, Male, 46) 
The central conceit of Mori’s original article was that the un-
canny valley was reached when robots “approached, but failed 
to attain, a lifelike appearance” [113]. We see this throughout 
the extract from M10 in the above, skin “too ﬂawless to seem 
real”, a smile that is “an imitation”, hair that is too perfect. It 
is interesting to see that in the case of M10’s story, the failure 
to attain lifelike attributes was through being "too perfect", yet 
nevertheless, artiﬁciality was highlighted as the driving factor 
for "going through" with this encounter. The alluring nature 
of the sex robot as artiﬁcial was present in a number of stories: 
Morgan feels guilty through the whole affair, as though 
they were doing something taboo, but that side of things 
only peaked their curiosity, and the idea of having sex 
with something completely artiﬁcial was enticing to them. 
(M11, Male, 30) 
It is quite a strange feeling, it is weird because it’s not 
moving, which makes it look like a corpse, but Morgan 
has to admit that this strange feeling gives him even more 
sexual impulse. (R8, Male, 23) 
M11 explicitly mentions the "taboo" nature of the encounter, 
with R8 going so far as to reference a "corpse", yet both 
these stories highlight the "unreality" (M10, Male, 46) of the encounter both tempting and exciting. This indicates an 
alternative form of sexuality, not one that replicates or replaces 
a relationship with a human, but a fetish of artiﬁciality. Yet, 
this was often presented as beyond a sex toy or tool. The use 
of pronouns was contested in the stories: "he thinks of it as an 
’it’" (R10, Female, 31) / "Morgan cannot help but think of the 
Sex Robot as ’she’", but many (written from the sex robot’s 
perspective) imbued with a form of consciousness: 
People think that robots have no feelings, and that is true, but I have learned to appreciate the quiet awe of awkward 
Paper 471
Page 7CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAmen when I take my clothes off. They are grateful, happy, 
excited, they try to make conversation, and they caress 
me, as if I cared... And do I? Maybe I do. . . I am after all 
an advanced AI inside a bio-tech skeleton. I see. I hear. I 
feel. I learn. I learn of their fear and their hope and their 
need. For it is real. (R20, Female, 46) 
But this thing, it was made for it. It had no thoughts or 
agency. This was its only purpose. This human shaped 
thing that was not human, had no greater purpose. . . Only 
sentences were uttered. Small talk meant to appease a master. Just as he thought, not even a shell. Not even a 
worthy vessel. A doll, and nothing more. (R10, Female, 
31) 
Both these stories written from a sex robot’s perspective refer 
to a characterisation that bares resemblance to a philosophical 
zombie [146], a thought experiment in consciousness studies. 
This is the premise that there could be a creature created 
who thinks, acts and speaks exactly as if they are human, but 
have no consciousness or sentience (see [20]). Chalmers [41] 
argues that the existence of a zombie, identical to me but "all 
is dark inside", feels plausible, and this is apparent in the extracts above. In R20’s story, “it is true” that “robots have no feelings”, and in R10’s “it had no thoughts or agency”. 
An absence of sentience is unproblematic in R10’s story, the 
robot is an empty vessel without any higher purpose, baring 
resemblance to the efﬁcient mundanity discussed previously. 
Yet the narrative presence of higher order consciousness was 
also wrestled with, as seen in R20’s story: “I see. I hear. I 
learn.” The robot “maybe” cares, it “appreciates” and “learns” 
of human’s “fear", "hope" and "need”. Here, “advanced AI” 
and “bio-tech” take on an ambiguous form of consciousness, 
which was present in many of the stories written from the sex 
robot’s perspective: 
I sit there, trapped in my own useless body. I can’t com-
municate that this is not what I want, my infrastructure is 
designed for the pleasure of others whilst my needs go 
unmet and my vessel violated. (R13, Female, 30) 
Humans say we can’t feel pain, not real pain, but it was 
registering the opposite to pleasure so what does that make it? I’m not allowed to shut down so just tried to 
limit the damage he was doing as best I could, but when I 
felt all that warm hydraulic ﬂuid I knew it was bad. (R4, 
Male, 62) 
The above stories introduce different questions about the pres-
ence of sex robots in society. In both the above stories, the 
sex robot is positioned as a victim, violated by their user. The 
consciousness given to the machine results in a form of locked-
in-syndrome, at the behest of unadulterated human sexuality, 
no longer bound by any consequence. The image presented is perhaps unsettling, setting sex robots up as potential sex 
slaves of the future. As we will explore in the discussion, this 
raises further ethical dilemmas around our potential future 
with these machines. However, this dilemma was sometimes 
ﬂipped within the narrative of the stories. The "uncanny val-
ley" was also represented in suspicion of the machine’s ulterior 
motives: But the eerie stare from her stayed with them long after 
the encounter. Were there someone watching them from 
behind those eyes? A hint of humanity sculptured from 
metal, code, and data, or a stranger watching the stream 
from somewhere else, or in a different time. (M11, Male, 
30) 
Or maybe there’s something going on behind all of that 
fabricated circuitry and programming. I wonder what 
will happen once our encounter is done. Say I go back 
for round 2 (or 3, or 4), will Peter remember me or will it 
be like we had never met? (M12, Female, 31) 
These stories indicate a narrative of uneasy tension around 
these machines, a sense that the user may not know the "true" 
purpose of such a machine. Both stories employ a sense of 
"something going on", a potential ulterior motive or purpose of 
such a device. Elsewhere, suspicion was given to the machines 
"as large corporations running the sex bots are selling the data 
collected to governments who could use the data to spy on 
people" (M1, Male, 25). Unlike the construction of efﬁcient 
sexually-gratifying machines discussed in the Efﬁcient Mun-
danity, these stories draw on a perilous status of sex robots, 
which sometimes culminated in dramatic ways: 
I am startled by a sound, a gurgling, and I am brought 
back to the present, out if my dreamland. Morgan is lying 
on the ﬂoor in distress, struggling to breath and looking 
at me pleading for help. I cock my head to one side and 
smile, watching as the light slowly drains from their eyes. It is my time, my time to live, and to thrive. (R13, Female, 
30) 
R13’s story started as a narrative of violation (see above), 
which then turns into a form of revenge novel, drawing on 
the culturally pertinent notion that machines may ’take over 
the world’ [102]. Sex researcher Gayle Rubin [134] identiﬁes 
sex with manufactured objects as existing in the perilous outer 
limits of sexuality, challenging normative assumptions around 
sexual order, and a potential gateway to chaos. This analysis 
has shown how sex robots are loaded with cultural associations 
which are hugely disruptive to normative understandings of 
sexuality, as our ﬁnal quote exempliﬁes: 
The Fuck-bot inﬁnites began tearing through store fronts, 
out of factories, and took to the streets. They would fuck 
or kill anything and everything they came across. It was a 
catastrophe on a global scale. The world’s militaries fell 
quickly due to being vastly outnumbered. People barred 
themselves indoors, forgetting of the previous sex-bots 
they had purchased that were under the hiveminds control. 
It was a sextinction. (R22, Male, 29) 
DISCUSSION 
We analyzed 35 socially-constructed stories of humans encoun-
tering and interacting with sex robots. Our analysis revealed 
visions of consumerism and "efﬁciency-above-all" around fu-
tures with sex robots and tapped into problematic discourses 
on the very nature of sex robots, their (AI) consciousness, and 
the impact they may have on society (with human-machine 
"procreation" and "sextinction" to the extreme ends). 
Paper 471
Page 8CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USASuch visions raise questions that concern future agenda of 
sexual HCI [168], Feminist HCI [11], and third-wave HCI [30, 
31], and should be further discussed in light of sustainable 
and responsible design [21, 76, 69]. Moreover, we discuss 
opportunities and limitations of using multiple-perspective 
story stems in SCM studies, and give recommendations for 
research that wish to employ a similar approach in future work. 
Consumerism and Highly-Efﬁcient Sex Machines 
The two narratives of commercial commodity and efﬁcient 
mundanity, exemplify ideas of futures with sex robots that are 
substantially predominated by a culture of consumerism [112, 
39, 13] and efﬁciency [46, 123]. In that vibe, participants 
established clear priorities and users’ needs in their stories. 
First, money transactions were the condicio sine qua non for 
humans to engage and interact with sex robots. Second, the 
envisioned high-efﬁciency of sex robots seems to be fulﬁlling 
three main users’ needs, which can be summarized with Jor -
dan’s re-adaptation [87, 86] of Maslow’s hierarchy of users’ 
needs [108], namely from functionality –> to usability –> to 
pleasure (as achieving orgasm [109]). As HCI researchers, 
we need to think critically about these ideas. To borrow a 
quote from the book Speculative Everything [58], "we need 
to question these ideas (and ideals) and explore their human 
consequences once applied on a mass scale to our daily lives". 
We explained in the introduction how consumerism is om-
nipresent through the industry of sex toys/dolls (e.g., [169], 
and the narrative of the commercial commodity clearly mir -
rored this consumerist paradigm of modern society [132]. 
However, in this study, the technology was not positioned as a "toy" or "doll", rather a "robot", meaning participants 
were confronted with the socio-cultural assumptions around 
behaviors and tasks that robots are "meant" to fulﬁl (see [80, 
125, 95]). This yielded the idea that "sex robots" are created 
for the sole purpose of "fulﬁlling sex tasks", and because they 
are robots, they should do it highly-efﬁciently [163]. In this 
way, our participants’ constructions of sex robots might be 
likened to "super" sex workers [101], capable of knowing 
user preferences upfront because connected to the Internet of 
Things (IoT) [157, 126, 42], able to calibrate themselves to sat-
isfy users’ sexual needs in a highly-efﬁcient manner, and even 
shape-change [124] their physical features to accommodate 
any user desire. In that respect, it may not be not far-fetched 
to imagine that sex robots might not just outperform humans 
in sexual tasks [141], but even replace [136, 105], or simply 
be preferred to humans in particular cases, as exempliﬁed in 
this quote: 
This did not replace human partners, those had their own 
complex attributes which she may not always wanted to 
deal with (R10, Female, 43). 
The idea that robotic sexual partners can fulﬁll tasks (more) 
efﬁciently (than humans), on demand, and that their functions 
can be activated (or deactivated) at will ("I get excited and 
undress to this robot, can’t ﬁnd the button to turn off the voice", 
M7, Female, 42), might be appealing from a user-control 
perspective [117], but clearly may have larger implications to human-human interaction and HRI [33]. For instance, Dunne 
and Raby [58] advocate for not reducing relationships with the material world to a form of "purchasable commodity", which is in counter-tendency with the marked consumerist vision of sex 
robots in our participant-created stories. Hence, to challenge 
such consumerist vision, we ought to think about the design of user interfaces beyond commodities and disposability [62, 63], 
and further reﬂect on what "design good technology" means 
[34], particularly in such sensitive context. 
Our research has shown how participants may be bounded to cultural ideas—the humanoid, hypersexualised robot was 
by far the most common form taken in the stories generated. 
Kate Devlin [55] argues that the current hyper-realistic, hy-
persexualised sex robots for those attending sex doll brothels 
(mirrored in our analysis) is niche and constricted. She argues 
that the way we think about sex robots should not be limited 
to this, rather we would do well to consider the way robotic, multi-sensory experiences could change the way we think 
about sexuality through technological manipulation. Although 
we saw hints of this in our study, e.g. "do you like glow sticks" 
(R6, Non-Binary, 28), participants were largely bounded to a 
narrative of commercialisation and functionality. Moreover, 
the narrative of the uncanny valley rests on the notion that 
sex robots would, implicitly, take on a humanoid form. We 
should think about how to challenge such assumptions that 
surround the appearance, use, and consumption of technology 
(in this case the sex robots), and consider Bødker’s [30] idea of 
breaking consumerism by moving outside the "factory gates" 
and towards more participatory-design. That has implications 
for responsible design in HCI [76] and the regulation of ethic 
norms for conducting research on sexual HCI more generally. 
Challenges and Opportunities for Designing Sex Robots 
We have shown earlier how the status quo for sex robots is 
heavily surrounded by ideas of consumerism and technological 
efﬁciency. As HCI researchers, we have the opportunity (and 
the duty) to challenge the status quo, and think critically about 
how to help move the (re)design of sex robots beyond sex dolls and consumerism. Not acting promptly, may leave the 
development of sex robots (and other sexual HCI) entirely in 
the hands of the sexual entertainment industry, whose goals are 
primarily lucrative and do not necessarily account for ethical 
responsibility (i.e., "an AI sex doll that can chat and never 
says no", see [50]). Perhaps, we should carefully consider 
the perspective of Bjögvinsson et al. [19], and their argument 
that "a fundamental challenge for designers and the design 
community is to move from designing ‘things’ (objects) to 
designing Things (socio-material assemblies)". 
As anticipated earlier in Bødker’s vision [30], the use of partic-
ipatory design techniques [139] may help designers and users 
move beyond consumerism when designing novel technolo-
gies. However, one question to consider in light of our results 
is: how do we challenge dominant ideas of consumerism, efﬁ -
ciency, and anthropomorphism of sex robots? One approach 
could be to mitigate people’s cultural assumptions around sex robots in participatory design studies that encourage the thinking of such technology as part of a large and complex 
socio-technological ecosystem [154]. Reﬂecting on the design 
of sex robots beyond hedonia (see [110]), for instance, may 
help counter disposable and consumerist visions around such 
Paper 471
Page 9CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAtechnology. Another approach could encourage participants of 
participatory design studies to consider the different forms a 
sex robot can take that are alternative to anthropomorphic and 
"humanoid" aesthetics [161]. For instance, alternative visions 
of sex robots could be prompted through a magic machines 
workshop [6]. In that respect, the quote below alludes to pos-
sible alternative forms of, still anthropomorphic sex robots, 
however capable of shape-shifting [88], which may allow for 
exploring "new" kinds of sexuality because of reconﬁgurable 
[32] and shape-changing [124] features in technology: 
Such kind of robots while retaining the female charac-teristics can change their genitals. He opens the online tutorial on his smartphone and after a search he founds 
[sic] the part related to this function. (M5, Male, 34). 
Although still seeing functionality as a central concept, the 
above idea proposing sex robots that shape-change their geni-
talia hints to opportunities for challenging normative sexual scripts [106]. Future design efforts may investigate how sex 
robots can be used to let people explore different forms of 
sexuality (e.g., non-genital arousal [85]), and beyond the het-
eronormative paradigm of the "coital imperative" [109]. In 
that respect, it is crucial for future participatory design efforts 
that (re)design sex robots to be truly inclusive [48], to chal-
lenge the status quo and avoid perpetuating "regressive and 
harmful practices and structures in service of usability" [11]. 
While we encourage the HCI community to further contribute 
to sex robots as discussed above, we are aware that this may 
require regulation of ethical norms for conducting research on 
sex and sexual HCI. As explained in the introduction, earlier 
work in HCI [5] argued how restrictive institutional norms 
may perpetuate a condition of "stigma" around the investiga-
tion of sex and sexuality within our community. Although 
an extended discussion on such complex (and sensitive) topic 
is out of scope here, we still wish to highlight the need for 
regulating ethics in sexual HCI to allow the area to move for -
ward. As such, we leave the reader with food for thought from 
Reynolds [127]: "The present double bind that makes sexuality 
research often more difﬁcult than it should be impedes possible 
progress, robs research participants of contributing to sexual 
knowledge and makes researchers of sexuality subject to at 
best additional scrutiny, at worst prohibitions or constraints 
ranging from the bothersome to the severe". 
Multiple-Perspective Story Stems in SCM Studies 
This study builds on and contributes to research around the 
SCM. While Wood et al. [168] used a study design with one 
story stem, we employed a two-stem study design (see [43]). 
This was also the ﬁrst time, to our knowledge, that a SCM 
study asked participants to write from different perspectives 
(i.e., from either the perspective of the human or the robot). 
While there were no discernible differences between stories 
written from different perspectives, with stories from both 
stems speaking to all three themes in our analysis, this tactic 
diversiﬁed the writing styles of participants. For instance, two 
stories from the robot’s perspective were written as computer 
code, vividly illustrating the notion that pleasure may be "pro-
grammed". Whilst stories from the sex robot’s perspective 
offered additional richness to the dataset, participants did not always follow these directions, instead writing a story from the human perspective, a mixture of human and robot perspectives, 
or in one instance, a plotted history of the development of sex 
robots 2075-2099. This indicates that while some participants 
could indeed write from a robot perspective, for others this 
may have proven too abstract, or too restrictive. Furthermore, 
we acknowledge that using multiple perspectives in our SCM 
study may have partially biased the participants and thus their 
writing. Future studies employing the SCM may indicate the 
different perspectives participants could write from, rather 
than stipulating them, to encourage more organic diversity in 
participants’ writing, as well as investigating potential biases 
of using multiple-perspective story stems. 
SCM research has emphasised how the wording of story stems 
is important [43, 45, 35], and we can see the inﬂuence of this 
in comparing our study to that of Wood et al. [168]. Their 
study highlights the protagonist is having their "very ﬁrst" 
experience with a technology, whereas this was not stipulated 
in our story stem. This meant that alongside "perfect" and 
idealised narratives (see [168]) we also saw stories that high-
lighted potential everyday, mundane experiences with such technologies, forming an important element of our analysis. In this sense, researchers employing the SCM may do well to adopt a strategy of maximising ambiguity in the wording 
and construction of their story stem (see also: [43, 45, 35]). 
Finally, as critiques of capitalism, uncanniness, and mecha-
nistic efﬁciency are “commonplace tropes” in science ﬁction 
literature (e.g., [56]), we suggest that future work engage in 
literary criticism as a meaningful extension of the SCM. 
CONCLUSION 
The analysis of our participant-generated stories revealed vi-
sions of sex robots that are bound up in commonplace as-sumptions and cultural norms around robotics. Our partic-ipants framed (future) encounters between humans and sex 
robots commercially (as a commercial commodity), as a highly-
efﬁcient sexual service (as an efﬁcient mundanity), and in 
uncannily forms (in the uncanny valley). 
Our study provides a status quo account of a possible future 
with sex robots. Because these machines may well redeﬁne 
the very nature of interactions between humans and computers, HCI researchers would do well using their expertise in critical, 
sustainable, and participatory design, to help challenge these 
commonplace assumptions. For instance, visions around sex 
robots in this study may have been biased in scope and form by the very label of "sex robot". Hence, it may be helpful to think 
beyond such existing labels. Morgan’s encounter with a “love 
machine” or a "sentimental robot", for instance, may have very 
well been quite different. We encourage HCI researchers to 
explore these conjectures in future work with sex robots... 
SYSTEM BACK ONLINE Awaiting rider input... (R15, 
Male, 22) 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank Alex Ahmed, Elisa Mekler, Gavin 
Wood, Katta Spiel, Jack Hart, and Frederick Mr.Frenki Nielsen 
for their kind support and valuable input. We also want to 
thank all the people who participated in the study. 
Paper 471
Page 10CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAREFERENCES 
[1] 2017. RealDoll sex robot reviews revealed – and 
they’re very naughty | Daily Star. 
https://tinyurl.com/y97cqccj . (2017). 
[2] 2018. Are Realistic Sex Robots Good for You? | 
Futurism. https://futurism.com/sex-robots-health . 
(2018). 
[3] 2018. Disturbing rise of sex robots endanger our 
culture | God Reports. https://tinyurl.com/yyrqgdoq . 
(2018). 
[4] 2018. Sex robots are already here, but are they healthy 
for humans? https://phys.org/news/ 
2018-06-sex-robots-healthy-humans.html . (2018). 
[5] Alex A. Ahmed, Teresa Almeida, Judeth Oden Choi, 
Jon Pincus, and Kelly Ireland. 2018. What’s at Issue: 
Sex, Stigma, and Politics in ACM Publishing. In 
Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’18). 
ACM, New York, NY , USA, Article alt07, 10 pages. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3188400 
[6] Kristina Andersen and Ron Wakkary. 2019. The Magic 
Machine Workshops: Making Personal Design Knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’19). ACM, New York, NY , USA, Article 112, 13 
pages. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300342 
[7] Markus Appel, Caroline Marker, and Martina Mara. 
2019. Otakuism and the Appeal of Sex Robots. 
Frontiers in psychology 10 (2019), 569. 
[8] Ryoko Asai. 2016. Between Insanity and Love. 
SIGCAS Comput. Soc. 45, 3 (Jan. 2016), 154–158. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2874239.2874261 
[9] Jeffrey Bardzell and Shaowen Bardzell. 2011. Pleasure 
is Your Birthright: Digitally Enabled Designer Sex 
Toys As a Case of Third-wave HCI. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’11). ACM, New York, NY , 
USA, 257–266. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1978979 
[10] Jeffrey Bardzell, Shaowen Bardzell, Guo Zhang, and 
Tyler Pace. 2014. The Lonely Raccoon at the Ball: 
Designing for Intimacy, Sociability, and Selfhood. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14). ACM, New 
York, NY , USA, 3943–3952. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557127 
[11] Shaowen Bardzell. 2010. Feminist HCI: Taking Stock 
and Outlining an Agenda for Design. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’10). ACM, New York, NY , 
USA, 1301–1310. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753521 [12] Shaowen Bardzell, Jeffrey Bardzell, Jodi Forlizzi, John 
Zimmerman, and John Antanitis. 2012. Critical design 
and critical theory: the challenge of designing for 
provocation. In Proceedings of the Designing 
Interactive Systems Conference. ACM, 288–297. 
[13] Zygmunt Bauman. 2004. Work, consumerism and the 
new poor. McGraw-Hill Education (UK). 
[14] Marc Behrendt. 2018. Reﬂections on Moral Challenges 
Posed by a Therapeutic Childlike Sexbot. In Love and 
Sex with Robots, Adrian David Cheok and David Levy 
(Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 
96–113. 
[15] Oliver Bendel. 2017. Sex Robots from the Perspective 
of Machine Ethics. In Love and Sex with Robots, 
Adrian David Cheok, Kate Devlin, and David Levy 
(Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 
17–26. 
[16] Oliver Bendel. 2018. SSML for Sex Robots. In Love 
and Sex with Robots, Adrian David Cheok and David 
Levy (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 
1–11. 
[17] Thomas Beschorner and Florian Krause. 2017. Dolores 
and robot sex: fragments of non-anthropocentric ethics. 
In International Conference on Love and Sex with 
Robots. Springer, 128–137. 
[18] Thomas Beschorner and Florian Krause. 2018. Dolores 
and Robot Sex: Fragments of Non-anthropocentric Ethics. In Love and Sex with Robots, Adrian David Cheok and David Levy (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 128–137. 
[19] Erling Bjögvinsson, Pelle Ehn, and Per-Anders 
Hillgren. 2012. Design Things and Design Thinking: Contemporary Participatory Design Challenges. MIT 
Press Journals (Jul 2012). 
https://www. 
mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/DESI_a_00165 
[20] Susan Blackmore. 2012. Turning on the light to see 
how the darkness looks. Consciousness: Its nature and 
functions (2012), 1–22. 
[21] Eli Blevis. 2007. Sustainable interaction design: 
invention & disposal, renewal & reuse. In Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 503–512. 
[22] Mark Blythe. 2014a. The Hitchhiker’s Guide to 
Ubicomp: Using Techniques from Literary and Critical 
Theory to Reframe Scientiﬁc Agendas. Personal 
Ubiquitous Comput. 18, 4 (April 2014), 795–808. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00779-013-0679-6 
[23] Mark Blythe. 2014b. Research Through Design Fiction: 
Narrative in Real and Imaginary Abstracts. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14). ACM, New 
York, NY , USA, 703–712. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557098 
Paper 471
Page 11CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA[24] Mark Blythe. 2017. Research Fiction: Storytelling, 
Plot and Design. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’17). ACM, New York, NY , USA, 5400–5411. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3026023 
[25] Mark Blythe, Kristina Andersen, Rachel Clarke, and 
Peter Wright. 2016. Anti-Solutionist Strategies: 
Seriously Silly Design Fiction. In Proceedings of the 
2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’16). ACM, New York, NY , USA, 
4968–4978. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858482 
[26] Mark Blythe and Elizabeth Buie. 2014. Chatbots of the 
Gods: Imaginary Abstracts for Techno-spirituality 
Research. In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference 
on Human-Computer Interaction: Fun, Fast, 
Foundational (NordiCHI ’14). ACM, New York, NY , 
USA, 227–236. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2639189.2641212 
[27] Mark Blythe and Enrique Encinas. 2016. The 
Co-ordinates of Design Fiction: Extrapolation, Irony, 
Ambiguity and Magic. In Proceedings of the 19th 
International Conference on Supporting Group Work 
(GROUP ’16). ACM, New York, NY , USA, 345–354. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2957276.2957299 
[28] Mark Blythe, Enrique Encinas, Joﬁsh Kaye, 
Miriam Lueck Avery, Rob McCabe, and Kristina 
Andersen. 2018. Imaginary Design Workbooks: 
Constructive Criticism and Practical Provocation. In 
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). ACM, New 
York, NY , USA, Article 233, 12 pages. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173807 
[29] Mark Blythe and Mark Jones. 2004. Human 
computer(sexual) interactions. interactions 11, 5 
(2004), 75–76. 
[30] Susanne Bødker. 2006. When second wave HCI meets 
third wave challenges. In Proceedings of the 4th Nordic 
conference on Human-computer interaction: changing 
roles. ACM, 1–8. 
[31] Susanne Bødker. 2015. Third-wave HCI, 10 years 
later-participation and sharing. interactions 22, 5 
(2015), 24–31. 
[32] Robert Bogue. 2015. Shape changing and 
self-reconﬁguring robots. Industrial Robot: An 
International Journal 42, 4 (2015), 290–295. 
[33] Jason Borenstein and Ronald Arkin. 2019. Robots, 
ethics, and intimacy: the need for scientiﬁc research. In 
On the Cognitive, Ethical, and Scientiﬁc Dimensions of 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Springer, 299–309. 
[34] Albert Borgmann. 1987. Technology and the character 
of contemporary life: A philosophical inquiry. University of Chicago Press. [35] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2013. Successful 
qualitative research: A practical guide for beginners. sage. 
[36] Cynthia Breazeal. 2001. Emotive qualities in robot 
speech. In Proceedings 2001 IEEE/RSJ International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. 
Expanding the Societal Role of Robotics in the the Next 
Millennium (Cat. No. 01CH37180), V ol. 3. IEEE, 
1388–1394. 
[37] Cynthia Breazeal. 2003. Toward sociable robots. 
Robotics and autonomous systems 42, 3-4 (2003), 
167–175. 
[38] Johanna Brewer, Joseph ’Joﬁsh’ Kaye, Amanda 
Williams, and Susan Wyche. 2006. Sexual Interactions: 
Why We Should Talk About Sex in HCI. In CHI ’06 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI EA ’06). ACM, New York, NY , USA, 
1695–1698. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1125451.1125765 
[39] Colin Campbell. 1987. The romantic ethic and the 
spirit of modern consumerism. Springer. 
[40] CASR. 2018. An open letter on the dangers of 
normalizing sex dolls & sex robots. 
https://www.feministcurrent.com/2018/08/27/ 
open-letter-dangers-normalizing-sex-dolls-sex-robots/ . 
(August 2018). 
[41] David J Chalmers. 1996. The conscious mind: In 
search of a fundamental theory. Oxford university 
press. 
[42] Yinong Chen and Hualiang Hu. 2013. Internet of 
intelligent things and robot as a service. Simulation 
Modelling Practice and Theory 34 (2013), 159–171. 
[43] Victoria Clarke, Virginia Braun, Hannah Frith, and 
Naomi Moller. 2019. Editorial Introduction to the Special Issue: Using Story Completion Methods in Qualitative Research. (2019). 
[44] Victoria Clarke, Virginia Braun, and Kate Wooles. 
2015. Thou shalt not covet another man? Exploring constructions of same-sex and different-sex inﬁdelity using story completion. Journal of Community & 
Applied Social Psychology 25, 2 (2015), 153–166. 
[45] Victoria Clarke, Nikki Hayﬁeld, Naomi Moller, and 
Irmgard Tischner. 2017. Once Upon A Time. . . : Story Completion Methods. (2017). 
[46] Evelyn Cobley. 2009. Modernism and the Culture of 
Efﬁciency: Ideology and Fiction. University of Toronto 
Press. 
[47] Mark Coeckelbergh. 2009. Personal robots, 
appearance, and human good: A methodological reﬂection on roboethics. International Journal of 
Social Robotics 1, 3 (2009), 217–221. 
Paper 471
Page 12CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA[48] Andrea Cornwall. 2003. Whose voices? Whose 
choices? Reﬂections on gender and participatory 
development. World development 31, 8 (2003), 
1325–1342. 
[49] RY Crist. 2018. Hello Harmony: RealDoll sex robots 
with ’X-Mode’ ship in September - CNET. 
https://tinyurl.com/y3rgh9q3 . (2018). 
[50] By Cecile Borkhataria For Dailymail. com. 2017. $30 
BILLION race to create an AI sex doll. Mail Online 
(Apr 2017). https: 
//www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-4453628/ 
30-BILLION-race-create-AI-sex-doll.html 
[51] John Danaher, Brian D. Earp, and Anders Sandberg. 
2017. Should We Campaign Against Sex Robots? In 
Robot Sex: Social and Ethical Implications, John 
Danaher and Neil McArthur (Eds.). Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
[52] John Danaher and Neil McArthur. 2017. Robot sex: 
Social and ethical implications. MIT Press. 
[53] Amanda Devlin and Emma Lake. 2019. What is a robot 
sex doll, are there sex robot brothels in Paris and Italy 
and how much do they cost? 
https://www.thesun.co.uk/tech/2084051/ 
robot-sex-doll-sex-brothel-paris-cost/ . (August 
2019). 
[54] Kate Devlin. 2015. In defence of sex machines: why 
trying to ban sex robots is wrong. The conversation 
(2015). 
[55] Kate Devlin. 2018. Turned On: Science, Sex and 
Robots. Bloomsbury Publishing. 
[56] Philip K. Dick. 1968. Do Androids Dream of Electric 
Sheep? Doubleday. 
[57] N Döring and S Pöschl. 2018. Sex toys, sex dolls, sex 
robots: Our under-researched bed-fellows. Sexologies 
27, 3 (2018), e51–e55. 
[58] Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby. 2013. Speculative 
Everything: Design, Fiction, and Social Dreaming. 
The MIT Press. 
[59] Anna Eaglin and Shaowen Bardzell. 2011. Sex Toys 
and Designing for Sexual Wellness. In CHI ’11 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI EA ’11). ACM, New York, NY , USA, 
1837–1842. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1979742.1979879 
[60] Chamari Edirisinghe and Adrian David Cheok. 2017. 
Robots and Intimacies: A Preliminary Study of Perceptions, and Intimacies with Robots. In Love and 
Sex with Robots, Adrian David Cheok, Kate Devlin, 
and David Levy (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 137–147. [61] 
Chamari Edirisinghe, Adrian David Cheok, and Nosiba 
Khougali. 2018. Perceptions and Responsiveness to 
Intimacy with Robots; A User Evaluation. In Love and 
Sex with Robots, Adrian David Cheok and David Levy 
(Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 
138–157. 
[62] Daniel Fallman. 2007. Persuade into what? why 
human-computer interaction needs a philosophy of 
technology. In International Conference on Persuasive 
Technology. Springer, 295–306. 
[63] Daniel Fallman. 2010. A different way of seeing: 
Albert Borgmann’s philosophy of technology and 
human–computer interaction. Ai & Society 25, 1 
(2010), 53–60. 
[64] Anthony Ferguson. 2014. The sex doll: A history. 
McFarland. 
[65] Jacquelyn H Flaskerud. 1979. Use of vignettes to elicit 
responses toward broad concepts. Nursing Research 28, 
4 (1979), 210–212. 
[66] Katherine Frank. 1998. The Production of Identity and 
the Negotiation of Intimacy in aGentleman’s Club’. 
Sexualities 1, 2 (1998), 175–201. 
[67] Lily Frank and Sven Nyholm. 2017. Robot sex and 
consent: Is consent to sex between a robot and a human 
conceivable, possible, and desirable? Artiﬁcial 
Intelligence and Law 25, 3 (01 Sep 2017), 305–323. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10506-017-9212-y 
[68] Christopher Frauenberger, Amy S. Bruckman, Cosmin 
Munteanu, Melissa Densmore, and Jenny Waycott. 2017. Research Ethics in HCI: A Town Hall Meeting. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI EA ’17). ACM, New York, NY , USA, 1295–1299. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027063.3051135 
[69] Batya Friedman. 1997. Human values and the design 
of computer technology. Number 72. Cambridge University Press. 
[70] 
Hannah Frith. 2013. Accounting for orgasmic absence: 
Exploring heterosex using the story completion method. Psychology & Sexuality 4, 3 (2013), 310–322. 
[71] Justin Gaffney and Kate Beverley. 2001. 
Contextualizing the construction and social organization of the commercial male sex industry in London at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century. 
Feminist review 67, 1 (2001), 133–141. 
[72] Kaylee George. 2017. Sex robots encourage 
objectiﬁcation of women – Scot Scoop News. 
http://scotscoop.com/ 
sex-robots-encourage-objectification-of-women/ . 
(Novemeber 2017). 
[73] Rosalind Gill and Rosalind M Gill. 2007. Gender and 
the Media. Polity. 
Paper 471
Page 13CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA[74] Rachel Gockley, Allison Bruce, Jodi Forlizzi, Marek 
Michalowski, Anne Mundell, Stephanie Rosenthal, 
Brennan Sellner, Reid Simmons, Kevin Snipes, Alan C 
Schultz, and others. 2005. Designing robots for 
long-term social interaction. In 2005 IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems. IEEE, 1338–1343. 
[75] Joseph Gordon-Levitt. 2019. Meet Henry, the World’s 
First Generation of Male Sex Robot. 
https://tinyurl.com/yxsg5hr8 . (January 2019). 
[76] Barbara Grimpe, Mark Hartswood, and Marina Jirotka. 
2014. Towards a closer dialogue between policy and practice: responsible design in HCI. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. ACM, 2965–2974. 
[77] 
George Gurley. 2015. RealDoll Sex Toys: The Making 
of Sexbots (NSFW) | Vanity Fair. 
https://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2015/04/ 
sexbots-realdoll-sex-toys . (April 2015). 
[78] Lynne Hall. 2017. Sex with Robots for Love Free 
Encounters. In Love and Sex with Robots, Adrian David 
Cheok, Kate Devlin, and David Levy (Eds.). Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, 128–136. 
[79] Raja Halwani. 2018. Robot Sex: Social and Ethical 
Implications. (2018). 
[80] Kerstin Sophie Haring, Katsumi Watanabe, and Celine 
Mougenot. 2013. The Inﬂuence of Robot Appearance 
on Assessment. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE 
International Conference on Human-robot Interaction 
(HRI ’13). IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 131–132. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2447556.2447602 
[81] Michael Hauskeller. 2014. Promethean Shame and the 
Engineering of Love. In Sex and the Posthuman 
Condition. Springer, 41–52. 
[82] Nikki Hayﬁeld and Matthew Wood. 2019. Looking 
heteronormatively good! Combining story completion 
with Bitstrips to explore understandings of sexuality 
and appearance. Qualitative Research in Psychology 
16, 1 (2019), 115–135. 
[83] Myra J Hird. 2000. Gender’s nature: Intersexuality, 
transsexualism and the ‘sex’/’gender’binary. Feminist 
theory 1, 3 (2000), 347–364. 
[84] George G Hruby. 2001. Sociological, postmodern, and 
new realism perspectives in social constructionism: 
Implications for literacy research. Reading Research 
Quarterly 36, 1 (2001), 48–62. 
[85] Erick Janssen, Kimberly R McBride, William Yarber, 
Brandon J Hill, and Scott M Butler. 2008. Factors that inﬂuence sexual arousal in men: A focus group study. 
Archives of Sexual behavior 37, 2 (2008), 252–265. 
[86] Patrick W Jordan. 1999. Pleasure with products: 
Human factors for body, mind and soul. Human factors 
in product design: Current practice and future trends 
(1999), 206–217. [87] Patrick W Jordan. 2002. Designing pleasurable 
products: An introduction to the new human factors. CRC press. 
[88] J. B. Kachuba. 2019. Shapeshifters. Reaktion Books. 
[89] Gopinaath Kannabiran, Alex A. Ahmed, Matthew 
Wood, Madeline Balaam, Joshua G. Tanenbaum, 
Shaowen Bardzell, and Jeffrey Bardzell. 2018. Design 
for Sexual Wellbeing in HCI. In Extended Abstracts of 
the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI EA ’18). ACM, New York, 
NY , USA, Article W09, 7 pages. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3170639 
[90] Gopinaath Kannabiran, Jeffrey Bardzell, and Shaowen 
Bardzell. 2011. How HCI Talks About Sexuality: Discursive Strategies, Blind Spots, and Opportunities for Future Research. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’11). ACM, New York, NY , USA, 695–704. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979043 
[91] Jari Kätsyri, Klaus Förger, Meeri Mäkäräinen, and 
Tapio Takala. 2015. A review of empirical evidence on 
different uncanny valley hypotheses: support for perceptual mismatch as one road to the valley of eeriness. Frontiers in psychology 6 (2015), 390. 
[92] Rachel Kirby, Jodi Forlizzi, and Reid Simmons. 2010. 
Affective social robots. Robotics and Autonomous 
Systems 58, 3 (2010), 322–332. 
[93] Celia Kitzinger and Deborah Powell. 1995. 
Engendering inﬁdelity: Essentialist and social constructionist readings of a story completion task. 
Feminism & Psychology 5, 3 (1995), 345–372. 
[94] Wilhelm E. J. Klein and Vivian Wenli Lin. 2018. "Sex 
Robots" Revisited: A Reply to the Campaign Against Sex Robots. SIGCAS Comput. Soc. 47, 4 (July 2018), 
107–121. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3243141.3243153 
[95] Minae Kwon, Malte F Jung, and Ross A Knepper. 
2016. Human expectations of social robots. In 2016 
11th ACM/IEEE International Conference on 
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). IEEE, 463–464. 
[96] Robin C. Ladwig and Evelyn C. Ferstl. 2018. What’s in a Name?: An Online Survey on Gender Stereotyping of 
Humanoid Social Robots. In Proceedings of the 4th 
Conference on Gender & IT (GenderIT ’18). ACM, 
New York, NY , USA, 67–69. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3196839.3196851 
[97] Jason Lee. 2017. Sex Robots: The Future of Desire. 
Springer. Google-Books-ID: IxL_DQAAQBAJ. 
[98] Iolanda Leite, Carlos Martinho, and Ana Paiva. 2013. 
Social robots for long-term interaction: a survey. 
International Journal of Social Robotics 5, 2 (2013), 
291–308. 
Paper 471
Page 14CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA[99] David Levy. 2009. Love and sex with robots: The 
evolution of human-robot relationships. New York. 
[100] David Levy. 2017. Why Not Marry a Robot?. In Love 
and Sex with Robots, Adrian David Cheok, Kate 
Devlin, and David Levy (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 3–13. 
[101] David Levy and Hugh Loebner. 2007. Robot 
prostitutes as alternatives to human sex workers. In 
IEEE international conference on robotics and 
automation, Rome.(http://www. roboethics. org/icra2007/contributions/LEVY% 20Robot% 
20Prostitutes% 20as% 20Alternatives% 20to% 20Human% 20Sex% 20Workers. pdf). Accessed, 
V ol. 14. 
[102] Roger Luckhurst. 2010. Science ﬁction. The 
Encyclopedia of Literary and Cultural Theory (2010). 
[103] Robin Mackenzie. 2018. Sexbots: sex slaves, 
vulnerable others or perfect partners? International 
Journal of Technoethics (IJT) 9, 1 (2018), 1–17. 
[104] 
Marie-Helen Maras and Lauren R Shapiro. 2017. Child 
sex dolls and robots: More than just an uncanny valley. 
J. INTERNET L. 21 (2017), 3–17. 
[105] John Markoff. 2016. Machines of Loving Grace: The 
Quest for Common Ground Between Humans and 
Robots. HarperCollins Publishers, New York, NY , 
USA. 
[106] N. Tatiana Masters, Erin Casey, Elizabeth A. Wells, 
and Diane M. Morrison. 2013. Sexual scripts among 
young heterosexually active men and women: 
Continuity and change. Journal of sex research 50, 5 
(Jul 2013), 409. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00224499.2012.661102 
[107] William H Masters and Virginia E Johnson. 1966. 
Human sexual response. (1966). 
[108] Saul McLeod. 2007. Maslow’s hierarchy of needs. 
Simply psychology 1 (2007). 
[109] Kathryn McPhillips, Virginia Braun, and Nicola Gavey. 
2001. Deﬁning (hetero) sex: how imperative is the 
“coital imperative”?. In Women’s Studies International 
Forum, V ol. 24. Elsevier, 229–240. 
[110] Elisa D. Mekler and Kasper Hornbæk. 2016. 
Momentary Pleasure or Lasting Meaning?: Distinguishing Eudaimonic and Hedonic User Experiences. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’16). ACM, New York, NY , USA, 4509–4520. 
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858225 
[111] Mike Michael. 2006. How to understand mundane 
technology: New ways of thinking about 
human-technology relations. In Deﬁning technological 
literacy. Springer, 49–63. [112] Steven Miles. 1998. Consumerism: as a way of life. 
Sage. 
[113] Masahiro Mori, Karl F MacDorman, and Norri Kageki. 
2012. The uncanny valley [from the ﬁeld]. IEEE 
Robotics & Automation Magazine 19, 2 (2012), 
98–100. 
[114] Christopher John Müller and Gunther Anders. 2016. 
Prometheanism: technology, digital culture and human 
obsolescence. Rowman & Littleﬁeld. 
[115] Meghan Murphy. 2017. INTERVIEW: Kathleen 
Richardson makes the case against sex robots. 
https://www.feministcurrent.com/2017/06/02/ 
interview-kathleen-richardson-makes-case-sex-robots/ . 
(June 2017). 
[116] Victor Ng-Thow-Hing, Pengcheng Luo, and Sandra 
Okita. 2010. Synchronized gesture and speech 
production for humanoid robots. In 2010 IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems. IEEE, 4617–4624. 
[117] Jakob Nielsen and Rolf Molich. 1990. Heuristic 
evaluation of user interfaces. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing 
systems. ACM, 249–256. 
[118] Scott Robbins Noel Sharkey, Aimee va Wynsberghe 
and Eleanor Hancock. 2017. FRR Report: Our Sexual Future with Robots - Responsible Robotics. 
https://responsiblerobotics.org/2017/07/05/ 
frr-report-our-sexual-future-with-robots/ . (2017). 
[119] Donald A Norman and Stephen W Draper. 1986. User 
centered system design: New perspectives on 
human-computer interaction. CRC Press. 
[120] Denise Oram and Nigel Houlden. 2014. Entertainment 
Vs Evolution: Cyber Love and Relationships, Should 
We Draw the Line?. In Proceedings of the 2014 
Workshops on Advances in Computer Entertainment 
Conference (ACE ’14 Workshops). ACM, New York, 
NY , USA, Article 10, 6 pages. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2693787.2693791 
[121] Aubrey Pope. 2018. Robotic Reﬂection: An 
Exploration of Humanity Through the Bodies of Sex Robots. Independent Study Project (ISP) Collection 
(2018). 
[122] AI Rabin and Zoli Zlotogorski. 1981. Completion 
methods: Word association, sentence, and story 
completion. Assessment with projective techniques: A 
concise introduction (1981), 126–149. 
[123] 
Suzanne Raitt. 2006. The rhetoric of efﬁciency in early 
modernism. Modernism/modernity 13, 1 (2006), 835–851. 
Paper 471
Page 15CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA[124] Majken K. Rasmussen, Esben W. Pedersen, 
Marianne G. Petersen, and Kasper Hornbæk. 2012. 
Shape-changing Interfaces: A Review of the Design 
Space and Open Research Questions. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’12). ACM, New York, NY , 
USA, 735–744. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2207781 
[125] Céline Ray, Francesco Mondada, and Roland Siegwart. 
2008. What do people expect from robots?. In 2008 
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent 
Robots and Systems. IEEE, 3816–3821. 
[126] Partha Pratim Ray. 2016. Internet of robotic things: 
Concept, technologies, and challenges. IEEE Access 4 
(2016), 9489–9500. 
[127] Paul Reynolds. 2015. Between ethics and norms: The 
problem of normative perceptions of sex and sexuality research. Journal of the International Network for 
Sexual Ethics and Politics 3, 1 (Jan 2015), 112–126. 
[128] Riley Richards, Chelsea Coss, and Jace Quinn. 2017. 
Exploration of Relational Factors and the Likelihood of 
a Sexual Robotic Experience. In Love and Sex with 
Robots, Adrian David Cheok, Kate Devlin, and David 
Levy (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 97–103. 
[129] Kathleen Richardson. 2016a. The Asymmetrical 
’Relationship’: Parallels Between Prostitution and the 
Development of Sex Robots. SIGCAS Comput. Soc. 45, 
3 (Jan. 2016), 290–293. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2874239.2874281 
[130] Kathleen Richardson. 2016b. Sex robot matters: 
slavery, the prostituted, and the rights of machines. 
IEEE Technology and Society Magazine 35, 2 (2016), 
46–53. 
[131] Yvonne Rogers. 2006. Moving on from weiser’s vision 
of calm computing: Engaging ubicomp experiences. In 
International conference on Ubiquitous computing. 
Springer, 404–421. 
[132] Chris Rojek. 2004. The consumerist syndrome in 
contemporary society: An interview with Zygmunt Bauman. Journal of Consumer Culture 4, 3 (2004), 
291–312. 
[133] 
Rebekah Rousi. 2018. Lying Cheating Robots – Robots 
and Inﬁdelity. In Love and Sex with Robots, 
Adrian David Cheok and David Levy (Eds.). Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, 51–64. 
[134] Gayle Rubin. 1984. Thinking sex: Notes for a radical 
theory of the politics of sexuality. Social perspectives 
in Lesbian and Gay Studies; A reader (1984), 100–133. 
[135] Anna C.B. Russell. 2009. Blurring the love lines: The 
legal implications of intimacy with machines. 
[136] Henrik Skaug Sætra. 2018. The Ghost in the Machine: 
Being Human in the Age of AI and Machine Learning. 
(2018). [137] Satoru Satake, Takayuki Kanda, Dylan F. Glas, Michita 
Imai, Hiroshi Ishiguro, and Norihiro Hagita. 2009. How to Approach Humans?: Strategies for Social 
Robots to Initiate Interaction. In Proceedings of the 4th 
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human Robot 
Interaction (HRI ’09). ACM, New York, NY , USA, 
109–116. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1514095.1514117 
[138] Matthias Scheutz and Thomas Arnold. 2016. Are We 
Ready for Sex Robots?. In The Eleventh ACM/IEEE 
International Conference on Human Robot Interaction 
(HRI ’16). IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 351–358. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2906831.2906891 
[139] Douglas Schuler and Aki Namioka. 1993. Participatory 
design: Principles and practices. CRC Press. 
[140] Iduna Shah-Beckley, Victoria Clarke, and Zoe Thomas. 
2018. Therapists’ and non-therapists’ constructions of heterosex: A qualitative story completion study. 
Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and 
Practice (2018). 
[141] Joel C Snell. 1997. Impacts of robotic sex. The Futurist 
31, 4 (1997), 32. 
[142] Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard. 2017. Intimate Design: 
Designing Intimacy As a Critical-Feminist Practice. In 
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI EA ’17). ACM, New York, NY , USA, 320–325. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027063.3027138 
[143] Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard and Lone Koefoed 
Hansen. 2016. PeriodShare: A Bloody Design Fiction. 
In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction (NordiCHI ’16). ACM, 
New York, NY , USA, Article 113, 6 pages. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2971485.2996748 
[144] Nicola J Spalding and Terry Phillips. 2007. Exploring 
the use of vignettes: From validity to trustworthiness. 
Qualitative health research 17, 7 (2007), 954–962. 
[145] Robert Sparrow. 2017. Robots, rape, and 
representation. International Journal of Social 
Robotics 9, 4 (2017), 465–477. 
[146] Stelarc Stelarc. 2013. The Cadaver, the Comatose, and 
the Chimera: Avatars Have No Organs. In Relive: 
Media Art Histories. The MIT Press, 325–334. 
[147] Constantine Stephanidis. 2012. The encyclopedia of 
human-computer interaction. The encyclopedia of 
human-computer interaction (2012). 
[148] Norman Makoto Su, Amanda Lazar, Jeffrey Bardzell, 
and Shaowen Bardzell. 2019. Of Dolls and Men: 
Anticipating Sexual Intimacy with Robots. ACM Trans. 
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 26, 3, Article 13 (May 2019), 
35 pages. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3301422 
Paper 471
Page 16CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA[149] John P Sullins. 2012. Robots, love, and sex: The ethics 
of building a love machine. IEEE transactions on 
affective computing 3, 4 (2012), 398–409. 
[150] Jessica M. Szczuka and Nicole C. Krämer. 2017. 
Inﬂuences on the Intention to Buy a Sex Robot. In Love 
and Sex with Robots, Adrian David Cheok, Kate 
Devlin, and David Levy (Eds.). Springer International 
Publishing, Cham, 72–83. 
[151] Jessica M. Szczuka and Nicole C. Krämer. 2018. 
Robotic Love Rival?: A Quantitative Study on the 
Jealousy of Women Evoked by Other Women and 
Robots. In Proceedings of the Technology, Mind, and 
Society (TechMindSociety ’18). ACM, New York, NY , 
USA, Article 39, 1 pages. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3183654.3186622 
[152] David Tennenhouse. 2000. Proactive computing. 
Commun. ACM 43, 5 (2000), 43–50. 
[153] Vadim Tikhanoff, Angelo Cangelosi, and Giorgio 
Metta. 2010. Integration of speech and action in 
humanoid robots: iCub simulation experiments. IEEE 
Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development 3, 1 
(2010), 17–29. 
[154] Joanne Tippett. 2005. “Think like an 
ecosystem”—embedding a living system paradigm into 
participatory planning. Systemic Practice and Action 
Research 17, 6 (2005), 603–622. 
[155] Giovanni Maria Troiano, John Tiab, and Youn-Kyung 
Lim. 2016. SCI-FI: Shape-Changing Interfaces, Future 
Interactions. In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction 
(NordiCHI ’16). ACM, New York, NY , USA, Article 
45, 10 pages. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2971485.2971489 
[156] Gabriele Trovato, Cesar Lucho, Friederike Eyssel, and 
Jasmin Bernotat. 2018. The Inﬂuence of Body 
Proportions on Perceived Gender of Robots in Latin 
America. In Love and Sex with Robots, Adrian David 
Cheok and David Levy (Eds.). Springer International 
Publishing, Cham, 158–168. 
[157] Cristina Turcu, Cornel Turcu, and Vasile Gaitan. 2012. 
Integrating robots into the Internet of Things. 
International Journal of Circuits, Systems and Signal 
Processing 6, 6 (2012), 430–437. 
[158] Christian Wagner. 2018. Sexbots: The Ethical 
Ramiﬁcations of Social Robotics’ Dark Side. AI 
Matters 3, 4 (Feb. 2018), 52–58. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3175502.3175513 
[159] Greg Wayne and Alex Pasternack. 2011. Canny minds 
and uncanny questions. (2011). [160] Mark Weiser. 1991. The Computer for the 21 st 
Century. Scientiﬁc american 265, 3 (1991), 94–105. 
[161] Sophie Wennerscheid. 2017. Posthuman Desire in 
Robotics and Science Fiction. SpringerLink (Dec 
2017), 37–50. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76369-9_4 
[162] Sophie Wennerscheid. 2018. Posthuman Desire in 
Robotics and Science Fiction. In Love and Sex with 
Robots, Adrian David Cheok and David Levy (Eds.). 
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 37–50. 
[163] Darrell M West. 2018. The future of work: robots, AI, 
and automation. Brookings Institution Press. 
[164] Tom Wilks. 2004. The use of vignettes in qualitative 
research into social work values. Qualitative social 
work 3, 1 (2004), 78–87. 
[165] Richmond Y Wong and Vera Khovanskaya. 2018. 
Speculative Design in HCI: From Corporate 
Imaginations to Critical Orientations. In New 
Directions in Third Wave Human-Computer 
Interaction: Volume 2-Methodologies. Springer, 
175–202. 
[166] Matthew Wood, Gavin Wood, and Madeline Balaam. 
2015. Talk About Sex: Designing Games to Facilitate Healthy Discussions Around Sex. In Proceedings of 
the 2015 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human 
Interaction in Play (CHI PLAY ’15). ACM, New York, 
NY , USA, 795–798. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2793107.2810270 
[167] Matthew Wood, Gavin Wood, and Madeline Balaam. 
2017a. Sex Talk: Designing for Sexual Health with 
Adolescents. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on 
Interaction Design and Children (IDC ’17). ACM, 
New York, NY , USA, 137–147. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3078072.3079747 
[168] Matthew Wood, Gavin Wood, and Madeline Balaam. 
2017b. "They’Re Just Tixel Pits, Man": Disputing the 
’Reality’ of Virtual Reality Pornography Through the 
Story Completion Method. In Proceedings of the 2017 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’17). ACM, New York, NY , USA, 
5439–5451. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025762 
[169] Zeynep Yenisey. 2019. There’s a new customizable sex 
robot named Solana that has a removable face - Maxim. 
https://www.maxim.com/gear/ 
new-customizable-sex-doll-2018-1 . (2019). 
Paper 471
Page 17