13
Of Dolls and Men: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy with Robots
NORMAN MAKOTOSU, Indiana UniversityBloomington
AMANDALAZAR, Universityof Maryland
JEFFREYBARDZELLand SHAOWEN BARDZELL, IndianaUniversityBloomington
Sex and intimate technologies are important in people’s everyday lives. A class of technologies that is
becomingincreasinglymoreprominentindiscussionsofthefuturearesexrobots.Inthisarticle,wepresent
aqualitativeanalysisofpostsfromaforumwherepeopledescribetheirinteractionswithsexdollsandtheir
motivations for using them through text and photographs. Forum users use dolls as a content authoring
interface, imbue them with agency, and construct meaningful sexual relationships with them. Implications
forthedesignoffuturerobotsandautonomousagentsinhumans’everydaylivesarediscussed.Wehighlight
that sex dolls are used for more than just sex; they provide fertile ground for embodied fictions and care of
theself.Future,customizable technologies for sexualintimacy and wellness shouldaccount forthis use.
CCSConcepts:• Human-centered computing →Empirical studies in HCI ;
Additional KeyWords and Phrases:Sexuality, intimacy, wellness,care, embodiment, robots,online forums
ACM Reference format:
Norman Makoto Su, Amanda Lazar, Jeffrey Bardzell, and Shaowen Bardzell. 2019. Of Dolls and Men: An-
ticipating Sexual Intimacy with Robots. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 26, 3, Article 13 (May 2019), 35
pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3301422
1 INTRODUCTION
Much public discourse on sex robots centers around their inevitability [ 46,58]. The reasoning is
as follows: humans readily establish meaningful relationships with non-human entities such as
pets(real,virtual,orrobotic),robots,andvirtualagents.Asrobotsandotherautomatedembodied
agents increasingly become part of our everyday lives, it follows that sooner or later they will
becomepartofourintimateandsexuallives.Probablysooner:surveyshavedemonstratedamarket
potential for sex robots [ 79,82]. Academics and the popular media have seized on the salacious
andcontroversialnatureofsexrobots.Weareconcernedthatsalaciousness,controversy,prejudice,
and taboo have the combined potential to prevent the scientific community from participating in
theshapingofnear horizonwellnesstechnologies.
This work wassupported inpartbythe NationalScienceFoundation under award1513604.
Authors’ addresses: N. M. Su, J. Bardzell, and S. Bardzell, School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering, Indiana
University,919E.10thStreet,Bloomington,IN47408,USA;emails:{normsu,jbardzel,selu}@indiana.edu;A.Lazar,College
of InformationStudies, University of Maryland,4130CampusDr,CollegePark, MD20740,USA; email:lazar@umd.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
honored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
© 2019Copyright held bytheowner/author(s). Publicationrights licensed toACM.
1073-0516/2019/05-ART13$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3301422
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:2 N.M.Su et al.
One way HCI, human–robot interaction (HRI), and health informatics researchers might con-
tribute to the development of these wellness technologies is to investigate the use of precursor
technologies to sex robots: sex toys, virtual world/virtual reality (VR) sex, camboys/girls, teledil-
donics, and so on. As others have argued, one precursor to sex robots are sex dolls [ 44,46,58].
Although they presently lack computation and automation, recent technological innovations in
materialsandmanufacturinghaveledtoincreasinglyrealisticsexdolls.Themostprominentbrand
ofsexdollsmaybeRealDolls—mostlyfemale,life-sized,detailed,expensive,andanatomicallycor-
rectsiliconedollswithaskeletalframe.RealDollshavecapturedthepublicmindthroughpopular
media.Documentaries[ 80]andfilms[ 6]offerrealandfictionalperspectivesintotherelationships
people form with dolls [ 1,16]. And Abyss Creations, their manufacturer, has already taken steps
to create sex robots via the Realbotix Project: “The obvious next step in Realdoll evolution is in-
tegrating movement with the addition of robotic components” [ 72]. They have already released
theHarmonyApp,asmartassistantforintimateinteractionsthatwilleventuallybeintegratedin
physicalRealDolls.
This research direction fits within calls in HCI and CSCW to focus on topics that have been
previously taboo in the community [ 52]: sex and sexuality. Thus far, there has been research on
intimate relationships, hookup/dating apps, and even sex toys [ 7,8,22,45,90,94]. Prior to this
work were calls for HCI research on pornography [ 17,24], though this call does not appear to
have been taken up. In part, the slow uptake of this line of research may be due to discomfort
of researchers [ 52]. In addition to the usual taboos surrounding sexuality, there are suspicions
that the research is in support of obscenity and perversion or perpetuates the subjugation, ob-
jectification, and oppression of women [ 98]. The possibility of sex robots brings forth a number
ofadditionalethicalandmoralquandariesidentifiedinresearchandpopularliteraturestemming
from the role they will have in sex work, unusual or taboo forms of pornography, relationships
and marriage, gendering, and religious sanctions [ 4,15,46,58,63,73,75,78]. Real Dolls raise
many oftheseconcerns.The(mostlyfemale)dolls aresupersexualized,withrealisticsexorgans;
asdolls,theyareinanimateobjects,correspondingtothemisogynistictropeofthepassivefemale
partner; visually, their realism immediately suggests pornography; they have been rented out in
ways that have raised negative responses comparing this model to brothels [ 81]; and starting at
US$6,000,theyimplyaconsiderableunmetneedonthepartoftheuserthatsomemaynotwishto
acknowledge.
Without dismissing any of these concerns, we stress that setting aside this topic of research
withoutinvestigatingitmayberespondingbasedonpreconceivedideasthatmanyofusbringto
the topic. For example, the dolls’ visual similarity to pornography immediately activates people’s
strong feelings about pornography: but are Real Dolls best understood as a kind of porn? The
dolls’ participation in the tropes of misogynistic heterosexual male fantasies is also immediately
concerning—but do actual users only enactthese sorts of fantasies? The (mostly) men who buy
themare(mostly)choosingadollinsteadofarealwoman—butdoesthetropethattheyaredoing
so as a way to objectify women really capture what is going on here? In both scholarly work and
popularmedia,ownersofsexdollsareoftenfeaturedasextremeorunusual,withsexdollsandthe
future of sex robots sensationalized. This narrative contrasts with research: a survey found that
while participants restricted those who knew about their ownership of dolls to a select circle of
people,theydidnotexhibitsignificantlyhighermental-illnessnorlesssatisfactionwiththeirlives
than the general US population [ 89]. People regularly form intimate (both sexual and nonsexual)
relationships with, derive wellness from, and engage in fantasies about the technologies around
them. Thus, it behooves us to move beyond framing doll users as lying on the fringes of society.
As researchers, we are taking a stance in which we respect those whom we study, and we try do
so whileneithercelebratingnor censuringtheirpractices.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:3
Further, we believe that studying sex doll users provides a glimpse of how people in the future
mightrelatetorobotsandsimilartechnologiesandagents.Thosetechnologiescanunfoldinways
that better support scientific as well as critical understandings of sexual wellness or ways that
subvertit.Ourstrategyofenvisioningthedesignoffuturetechnologiesbasedoncurrentusageof
“non-” technological artifacts has proven fruitful in areas of HCI like domestic technologies [ 18,
96]. Moreover, approaches such as futures [ 51,64] and “magic machine” workshops [ 5,23]s p e a k
toaschoolof thoughtinHCI thatforegroundsuserinsightsunrestrictedbycurrenttechnologies
anddirectednottowardincrementalimprovementsincurrenttechnologies,butmoreforwardinto
the future. Following this, we choose not to follow the tack of studying early adopters of nascent
models of sex robots. Due to current technological limitations, sex robots are often designed by
individual end users and have limited functionality. Thus, we expect that this approach might
result in findings reflecting a tunnel vision centered around the capabilities designed into these
dolls and current ways of thinking about sex robots. Real Dolls, on the other hand, offers both a
malleablecanvasfortheusertocreativelypracticesexualintimacyonamultitudeofwaysandan
artifact that partially renders the future of embodied intimate technologies. This group of users
may not represent the majority of future sex robot users. They may not even wish to interact
with technologically-augmented Real Dolls. But—by looking at the ways that people bring the
inanimate dolls that are the subject of this article to life—we uncover needs of this set of users,
suchasintimacyunrelatedtothesexualbody,thatwereperhapsnotimaginedbysexdolldesigners
(and do not appear to be conceived of by sex robot designers either). We argue that studying this
groupofusers,thoughtheirpracticescannotbeseenasrepresentativeofthelargerpopulationor
generalizableinanyway,doleadustonewwaysofthinkingaboutsexualintimacywithembodied
technologies.
In this study, we foreground the practices of Real Doll users through a study of participants of
TheDollForum(TDF),anonlineforumwhereusersdiscusstheirinteractionswithRealDolls.As
opposedto “a very high form of masturbation,”[ 85, p. 236], we describe how users imaginatively
fashion their Real Dolls, comporting their bodies to make their dolls not just a human-shaped
sex appliance but like a real human being with agency. In other words, for the user, the Real
Doll becomes a human-like body that inhabits the home with purpose through its motions with
theowner.Ontheforum,participantscollaborativelyillustratebothactualandvirtualmovement
of dolls through visual imagery and texts, shedding light on how they experience the realin Real
Dolls. At its most basic level, this “movement” is accomplished by positioning the limbs of Real
Dolls.However,dollsalsomoveinlessliteralways:throughtheimaginationsoftheirowners,and
in visualand textualdiscourseinterwovenintoeveryday lives.
ThisarticleofferstwocontributionstohelpsupportdesignersinHCIastheyincreasinglytake
on theways thathumanslive everydaywithrobotsand autonomousagents:
—A qualitative analysis following a constructivist grounded theory approach of Real Doll
users’ practices on an online forum. Visual imagery and verbal descriptions, narratives,
andrecommendationsareusedbylike-mindedindividualstoimbuethedollswithlife.The
bodies of users and dolls are discursively coupled in diverse and often surprising ways,
constructing subjectivities for both owners and dolls. Despite the outward passiveness of
thedolls, theyplayan activerole inthelives of theirusers.
—Possible directions and implications for future forms of intimacy and self-care as research
anddevelopmentagendasinHRI.Everydaysexualintimacyisseenascontiguouswith,not
separated from, other forms of social engagement and wellness, and thus, this work has
implicationsbeyond thenarrowpurposeof designingsexrobots.
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:4 N.M.Su et al.
2 BACKGROUND
2.1 Human–Robot Interaction
In both the fields of artificial intelligence and robotics, researchers have aimed to design tech-
nologies that simulate human appearance and interaction [ 34], including face-to-face conversa-
tion [57] and affective touch [ 33]. Though artificial intelligence research originally saw robots as
a “computer on wheels,” a paradigm shift recognized the importance of taking into account the
wayarobotis“embodied,situated,surroundedby,respondingtoandinteractingwithitsenviron-
ment” [34].
One active area of research in HRI has been to examine people’s preferences for the form
(e.g., size, shape, color) and function (tasks such as cleaning or providing medications) of ser-
vice robots [ 26]. Research has also looked into how robots should act, with social rules for robot
behavior, or robotiquette [ 34]. This includes the study of robot proxemics, or how a comfortable
distancebetweenhumansandrobotdependsontheirrelationship[ 48,88,91].Theconceptofrobot
personalityandanthropomorphismhasbeenexplored.Forexample,Hendriksetal.[ 47]advocate
for using a personality model to develop robot behavior. The authors solicited preferences from
participantsforarobotvacuumthatcouldbe,amongothertraits,calm,jealous,curious,polite,or
spontaneous. Though topics such as how robots should appear and interact have been studied in
HRI,thesetopicshavelargelybeenlimitedtothedesignofservicerobotsthatdoparticulartasks
(e.g., vacuuming) [ 34] and, to a lesser extent, platonic companion robots. Preferences for robots
thattakeonmoreintimateroleshavenotyetbeenfullystudied—forpreliminaryworkinthisarea,
seethediscussionon thesurveyconductedbyScheutzandArnold[ 79]belo w .
2.2 Sex and HCI
Ina2004article,BlytheandJones[ 24]arguedforthestudyofpornographyinHCIwiththeobser-
vationthattheproliferationofmediasuchasdigitalphotographshavemadesexualimagerycom-
monplace. Since that call, there has been growing interest in sexuality in the HCI and CSCW dis-
ciplines[22,25,79,90,94].Kannabiranetal.[ 52]providesacomprehensivecritical(Foucauldian)
discourse analysis of sexuality in the HCI field. We particularly find inspiration from their call
to see sexuality as not simply a special or interesting subject of inquiry but rather an important
aspect of everyone’s everyday, lived practices; sexuality in HCI should have implications beyond
sex. We also take to heart their mandate to be critically reflexive [ 30] of our own positions and
push back against sometimes subconscious hetreonormative notions of sex and gender that per-
vade our field. Here, we will cover some of the works covered in that survey but also extend to
more recentresearchand otherareasof researchthathavedirectrelevanceto ourown work.
The relationships between sexuality and technology offer insights into the tension between
noveltyandchangeontheonehand,andmoreenduringsexualthemesandpracticesontheother.
Forexample,Kannabiranetal.[ 53]analyzed ijustmadelove.com ,anapplicationbuiltontopofthe
GoogleMapsAPIthatalloweduserstogeolocateanddescribetheirsexualencounters.Theyfound
thattheapplicationallowedapracticeofanonymousexhibitionismthatisdifficultinthephysical
world, and that once users discovered it, they began to develop an erotic desire to both produce
andconsumeit,whichinturnledtonewdiscursiveandsocialpractices.Theirresultssuggestthat
technologyhelpstoestablishnew eroticpossibilities.
In contrast, other HCI research on sexuality has found that in spite of sometimes exotic new
technologies, not so much had changed. For example, sex toys, despite their function and pro-
duction as a result of digital technologies, remain politically fraught. One study [ 42]o fs e xt o y
entrepreneurscomplicatesthenotionofdesigningforacertainvalue,findingthatmoralcommit-
mentsbecome“contingent,localizedpoliticsofdistributionchoices”inpractice.Anotherstudy[ 7]
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:5
ofhowdesignphilosophiesshapesextoysfoundthatdesignerscommunicateandworkwithusers
and sex experts, thus mobilizing forces around digital objects as social activism to advocate sex
education,health,andwellness.Suchdesignsmayfacechallengesinbeingacceptedduetosocial
taboos [36]. For all that technology has transformed sex toys in the past 15 years, discourses and
practicesaroundthemremain static.
Thistensionbetweentechnologies’roleintransformingandevencreatingnewsexualpractices
anderoticpossibilitiesontheonehand,andinreproducingearliersexualculturesontheotheris
visible across a series of papers about virtual BDSM (bondage, domination, and sadomasochism)
in the virtual world of Second Life (SL), by Bardzell, Bardzell, Odom, Pace, and Freeman. This
research showed how BDSM practices from the physical world, the art world, and science fiction
would become reproduced in a virtual world [ 9,14]. Bardzell and Bardzell [ 11] argue that fetish
sex practices can be interpreted as aesthetic experiences, in the same ways that Dewey [ 35]a n d
McCarthy and Wright [ 66] characterize aesthetic experiences. They observe that virtual BDSM
experiences are constituted out of materials mostly drawn from contemporary culture, including
the standardized visual languages of S&M (e.g., leather and steel materials, the colors black and
red, and symbols of power and authority drawn from religion and law enforcement). It also built
onprioreroticnarratives,rangingfromcommonscriptsforindividualsexualencounters(e.g.,the
nurseandpatient,themaidandthemaster,thecopandthebadboy/girl),allthewaytofullblown
online simulationsof aseriesof fantasynovels (theworldof Gor).
Inalaterstudy,Bardzelletal.[ 8]offeracriticalempiricalanalysisofmediatedsocialintimacy.
Drawing from Foucault’s identity theory, they examined how SL members were both subjected
to external institutions and were, far from being hapless victims of these institutions, themselves
subjectsthatshaped(stylized)theirparticipationinsuchinstitutions.Theygiveanexampleofhow
volunteeringtodocybersexingledamaleSLparticipanttofeelanunexpectedlossofcontroland
to adopt a “female perspective”—suchan analysis foregrounds the socialexperiences,rather than
merelycreativepracticesofonlinemembers.Theyarguethat“socialcreativepracticesoftenunfold
in intimate experiences; conversely, being intimate with others often demands skilled creativity.”
In short, participants in SL create and perform narratives that infuse online virtual worlds with
extensive repertoires drawn widely from mainstream culture and subcultures alike, resulting in
erotic experiences that are best understood as inventively reproducing, but not as disruptively
transforming,theirexistingeroticlives ina new medium.
Giventhistensionbetweenthenoveltiesthatnewtechnologiesmakepossibleandthefactthat
sexualexperiencestendtodrawrichlyandeveneclecticallyfromculture,itisnotsurprisingthat
many of the issues identified in the ijustmadelove.com , sex toy, and SL research also manifest in
the present study of Real Dolls. Our work also speaks to fetishes and how users go beyond the
design of “real-life” dolls, but in a more, physically, as opposed to virtually, embodied sense. In
addition, we are interested in how boundaries between real and virtual mesh in this experience.
WhereasthevirtualworldofSLcanserveasastageexplicitlyvisualizingtheentireexperienceof
BDSM, the online forum in this article offers a more focused view into the world of doll owners.
We also focus on the ways in which visual and literary aesthetics reinforce gendered stereotypes
allthewhileownersseektogivetheirdollsagency.Lastly,whileSLofferspeopleanopportunity
to have intimate experiences with each other (i.e., real people behind virtual avatars), the forum
that is the subject of our study offers an opportunity to prod and disclose creative practices in
realizingintimate experienceswithdolls.
2.3 Technosexuality and HRI
BeyondHCI,wealsosituatethepresentworkinPornStudies,legitimizedbyLindaWilliams[ 92]
asascholarlydisciplinethatexplorespornographyasaculturalform.Forexample,writingabout
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:6 N.M.Su et al.
pornography consumption in the digital era, Patterson [ 69] posits that the genre of online “ama-
teur”pornography,aidedbytechnologicalapparatus,offersopportunitiesforself-productionand
interactionbetweenviewerandwomen-as-spectacle.Usingsexviawebcamasacase,Alilunas[ 2]
argues that technologies afford not only exuberant exhibitionism and virtual connectedness but
newformsofsexualintimacyanderoticismofeverydaylifethatrequirenewdiscursivemechanism
to describe and understand them as they are phenomenologically different. Taken together, we
consider the work we survey here in the emergent research area of technosexuality that explores
“the ways in which technology has produced or configured sexuality, how technology become
sexualized and how sexuality has in turn configured technology in society” [ 43]. In other words,
humansexualityisnotfixedbutiscapableofchange,andthattechnologyispartiallyconstitutive
of human experience,desire,and self-expression[ 12].
Though sex robots have been studied in terms of ethical and legal implications [ 60,73,78,97],
ScheutzandArnold[ 79]areperhapsthefirstresearchersinthefieldofHRItobroachthesubject.
Their survey examined differences between the attitudes of women and men towards the role of
robots in sex. Both genders found using sex robots to maintain and protect relationships as well
as finding relationshipsin isolated places as acceptable.However, women rated sex robots as less
appropriate than men who overall were more open to the possible forms and use of sex robots.
ScheutzandArnold[ 79]surmisethatthesedifferencesstemfrommediathatcaterstomalesasthe
primarycustomeranduserofsubmissivesexrobots.Inanothersurvey,SzczukaandKrämer[ 87]
foundnorelationbetweenparticipants’reportedfeelingsoflonelinessandhowsexuallyattractive
they rated robots with or without obviously mechanical body parts. These two surveys serve to
counter popular perceptions that users of sex dolls or robots are “social misfits” [ 58, p. 304] and
reinforcetheneedforresearchtogobeyondthemerephysicalactofsex.Ourworkcomplements
thissocialpsychologyscholarshipthatidentifyfactorsaffectingpeople’sperceptionofsexrobots;
drawing from ethnographic methods to empathize with users [ 95], we identify how the felt and
lived experiences that people are currently having with technosexuality, as manifested by Real
Dolls, caninformfuturedesigns forintimacy and self-care.
2.4 Dolls and Real Dolls
ThehighfidelityandcostofRealDollshasattractedpopularmediaattention.Forexample, Larsand
theRealDoll ,afilmstarringRyanGosling,wasnominatedforanAcademyAwardinscreenwriting
and received favorable reviews. Two chapters from Marquard Smith’s [ 85]b o o k ,The Erotic Doll:
AModernFetish ,hasdirectrelevancetoourwork.Inonechapter,Smithdescribesthecommission
by artist Oskar Kokoschka in 1918 of a life-sized doll modeled on his ex-paramour, Alma Mahler.
The account details the private correspondence between the obsessive Kokoschka and the doll
creator,adressmaker.SmithexaminesKokoschka’ssheeranticipationofthedollandtheultimate,
disappointingreceptionofthedoll.Here,thenotionofthedollasathingorobject(orinourterms
in thisarticle,as anobjectintheworld) is alluded:
[I]t is not just that the doll embodies the idea of the fantasy, the possibility to act
as a surrogate for his lost love, to be Mahler, but rather that the Silen Woman’s
[i.e.,thedoll’s]lifelessnessistheverythingthatKokoschkadesires...[Kokoschka]
isattachedtoitasafetishticobjectofdesirebutalsoandallthemoreasadesirous
thingtobe made useof. (pp.128–129)
Smith’s point is that Kokoschka thought he wanted something that would come close to his rela-
tionshipwithMahler,but,intheend,whathereallywantedwasadoll—somethinghecouldonly
realize upon receiving the doll. Smith notes that the dressmaker used all her creativity—feminine
sensibility—to make a life-like doll (given the limited materials then). Similar to our doll users,
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:7
Kokoschka never tells us whether he consummated with the doll. Though a deeply personal ac-
count,Smith’sdescriptionofKokoschka’sdoll,andinparticularthetensionoftryingtohaveboth
thedollasthingand subjectisechoedin ourown findings.
This ambiguity that Kokoschka comes to identify has parallels to observations that users of SL
have a sexual identity crafted through a dual phenomenon [ 8]. First, they are subjected to the
discourse and the institutions that produce it. Second, they are subjects of their own volition in
relation to the aforementioned discourses. For instance, the flexible interactions afforded by SL
allowsuserstoengageinactsofintimacythatareimpossibletocarryoutinreallife.Atthesame
time,thissubjectiontotheSLeco-systemfacilitatestheuserbecomingasubjectofanexperience
ofintimacy,leadingtotheirowngrowthanddevelopmentasasexualbeing.ThecaseoftheReal
Doll,aswewillargueinthepaper,isausertreatingatechnology,albeitanon-digitalone,asboth
subjects of their own experiences (e.g., having agency) and as subjected to their needs (e.g., the
needtoprovideandreceivecare).Thistreatmentofatechnologyasaselfthatissubjectedtoand
subject of we believe foreshadows repertories of practices with ever more forms of customized,
personalizedtechnologiesforsexuality.
Smith’s chapter on Real Dolls is one of few academic works examining these dolls. She draws
her data from extant material, four interviews with Real Doll owners from a documentary called
Guys and Dolls . Some of the findings echo what we found forum members discussing—the com-
panionship of dolls and that dolls are “capable of giving and receiving love without denying that
theyarepassiveinanimate(p.231).”ThetensionthatSmithnotesbetweenrealismanddelusionis
toucheduponinourmainfindingsaswell.Finally,SmithalsomentionshowphotographsofReal
Dolls featurethemin mundane settings(e.g.,domestic spaces),giving thedolls ahistory(p.233).
Smith is useful in highlighting a common trope in the social construction of technology [ 70]:
howusersappropriatetheirartifacts,ignoringtheiroriginalintent.Morespecifically,wearedeal-
ingwithhowusersknowthatsexisnotasoullessactbutrathercanbeabout“makinglove.”Our
findings will broadly show that the act of giving a sexual object some verisimilitude, not only via
direct modification but the use of narratives and their associated artifacts, is inevitable. While a
largebodyofworkinCSCWhasshownhowonlinecommunitiesgiveitsuserssocialsupportand
knowledge exchange, in this article we highlight how online communities are part of an ecology
of artifactsthatsupportverisimilitude.
2.5 Sexuality and/in Feminist HCI
BardzellintroducedfeminismtoHCI[ 7,10],callingita“naturalallytointeractiondesign.”Femi-
nistperspectivestakemarginalizedperspectivesintoaccount,understandthatscienceisnotvalue-
free, and foregrounds (or at least does not ignore) gender and other qualities that are used as
grounds to oppress. Feminism and feminist HCI concerns itself with the body [ 10,76], and one
vein of feminist scholarship emphasizes somatechnics, or how the body actively plays a part in
producingknowledge,explainingthatthebodyisactuallyatechnologyfordisseminatingspecific
types of cultural and social knowledge [ 71]. With this perspective, “examining the body as tech-
nology means locating the body within technologies of power and the uses to which bodies are
put” [71]. Though research has begun to explore how feminism and sexuality/intimacy intersect
(e.g.,[3,13,42]),thedemandforandsocioculturalimpactsofsexualwellnesstechnologiessuggest
thatfarmoreisneeded.Inparticular,ascomputationbecomesincreasinglyphysical,tangible,and
embodied,researchisurgentlyneededonbody-orientedtechnologicallymediatedsexualwellness.
HCI researchers have also investigated how we might design for intimate and sexual inter-
actions. Kaye and Goulding [ 54] discuss the design of “intimate objects”—artifacts that support
intimate conversation between partners. Taking a critical technical approach that fundamentally
subvertsthecorepremiseofcommunicationdevices,theyinterviewedcouplesandaskedthemto
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:8 N.M.Su et al.
generate designed objects for communicating intimacy. For instance, some designs attempted to
replicatethesensationofholdingeachother’shands(e.g.,throughaheater).Theyarguethatcus-
tomizationmaybeanimportantdesignconcernwhendesigningobjects.Theseaspects—enabling
sensationsofintimacyviacustomizedobjects—aretoucheduponbyTDFparticipants.Woodetal.
[93,94] used a set of innovative methods to design for sexuality. They developed games sup-
porting particular principles (consent, intimacy, trust, momentum) that facilitate productive in-
teractions [ 94]. They also utilized the “story completion method” to speculatively have people
inexperienced with VR technology explore the use of VR in pornography. Participants described
ahighlypersonalfuturemergingsexandVRthatnonethelessreaffirmedheteronormativesexual
fantasies commonly depicted in pornography. Participants were at times aware of the dangers of
suchfuturisticscenariosofVRusewithsexualexperiences(e.g.,unabletoengageinsexwithreal
partners or unintended, undesired sexual encounters). Here, we see parallels to Wood et al.’s [ 93,
94] work with the personal, customized practices of doll users as well as their discourses around
themorality of technologiesfor sex.
3 RESEARCH APPROACH
WecollectedtextualandvisualtextsfromaforumdedicatedtoRealDolls.RealDollsarearguably
themostpopularlife-sizedsexdollbrand[ 85].Theforumisa“MeetingPlaceforLoveDollOwners
&Admirers.”
3.1 Data Collection
We developed a screen scraper in Ruby to fetch all posts from the “ABYSS Creations - RealDoll”
forumhostedat“TDF.”1Intotal,5,586threadsor79,214totalpostsrangingfromAugust14,2001
to September 9, 2015 were collected. Each thread, on average, contains 14.18 posts (SD =14.76).
Thisrepresentstheentirecorpusof postingson thisforumasof December9,2015.
Posts on TDF are publicly viewable without an account. TDF’s terms of service does require
users to be an adult (18 years or older). This study was submitted to and approved by our uni-
versity’s ethics review board. The forum is publicly accessible and anyone can access the content
(post texts and images) without an account. We also believe with the latest media attention on
RealDolls(bornindocumentariesandfictionfilm),membersknowthattheirpostingsareworld-
wideviewable.However,weacknowledgethetopicoftheforumsmaybeconsideredsensitiveor
offensive to non-members, and posters may not expect their postings to be subject to scholarly
research. Thus, we adopt parts of the “moderate disguise” strategy proposed by Bruckman [ 27].
We reveal the online forum’s name as it might be easily found with a cursory search. All quotes
have been obfuscated, or altered while preserving the meaning. Each quote is labeled with the
notation“[P N]”whereNisthethreadIDinourdata.Wherenames(whethertheyareofaperson
or doll) are relevant, they have been replaced with pseudonyms. We adopt TDF member terms in
thisarticle:weuseRealDoll,RD,anddollinterchangeably,andwesometimesrefertothosewho
have acquireda RDas “owners.”
Topreventso-calledreverse-imagesearches,weconsultedacomputervisionexpertandchoseto
obfuscateallfiguresbydistortingtheirdimensionsviaasmallaffinetransformation;wechanged
the image from a rectangle into a slightly non-rectangular, random quadrilateral. We have also
chosentocensoraspectsofimagesthatmayrevealtheposter’sidentityorbeconsideredinappro-
priate to some. While we cannot claim our methods will foil a determined individual, we believe
thisobfuscationstrategyprovidesabalancebetweenshowingrichdatatocomplementreportage
of ourfindings whilenot comprisingtheprivacyof forumusers.
1http://www.dollforum.com .
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:9
TherulesofconductforTDFstatethattheforumservestopromote“DollErotica,”notpornog-
raphy.Considerablespaceisdevoted tooutliningTDF’spolicyon photos:
[P]hotosofexplicitsexwithorwithoutadollarenotallowed,thisincludesphotos
ofbodyfluids,simulatedorotherwise.TDFdoesnotallowphotosofrealhumans
showing their genitalia. Only artificial representation of human genitalia are al-
lowed. No photos with anything inserted in the vagina or anus for sexual stim-
ulation. No photos with a penis-shaped object in the mouth. No photos that can
be considered violent. No photos of any dolls that may be perceived as under 18
regardless ofmanufacturer’sstatedage areallowed.
Photos occupy a special relevance to TDF users. Not only can members directly embed or link
photosin TDFposts,TDFhostsotherexternalwebsitesdevoted tophotoalbumsof love dolls.
Duetotheprimacyofthevisual,weareinterestedinthe visualdiscourse ofRealDolls[ 77].This
socialconstructivistapproach[ 50]seekstouncoverthetaken-for-grantedrealityweintersubjec-
tively experience [ 20] as socially constructed by the texts around us and scrutinizes the methods
bywhichsuchtextsaremaderelevantandindispensableintheworld.RealDollsaretangibleob-
jects that can be described with written text, but images are a powerful form of discourse on the
bodilyformofRealDolls.Thatis,webelievethatinadditiontowrittentext,imagesareaprimary
form of knowledge for doll owners; they delimit the body’s place in the world, how it should be
comported,anditslegitimateformsofpractice.TDFservesasasitebywhichimages(texts)allow
members todisseminateand shapeintersubjectiveknowledge aboutdolls.
For this reason, we opted to analyze posts that contain significant images. In our dataset, the
average number of images per thread was 5.46 (MED =4.00, SD =6.22), and the average size
of images was 7.91kB. We extracted all threads from our original data set that had at least two
posts(aninitialpostfollowedbyareply),amediannumberofimagesgreaterorequalto4.00(the
mediannumberofimagesperthreadinourdataset),andanaverageimagesizeofatleast2kB.This
ensuredthatthethreadswewouldanalyzehavesomeback-and-forthdialogueinvolvingimages,
a certain quantity of images (the upper half of our threads in terms of number of images), and
hadlargeand/orhigherqualityimages(e.g.,manyimagesusedbymembersweresimplygraphic
emoticons).Thisreducedourdatasetfrom5,586threadsto316threads(7,775totalposts).
3.2 Analytic Lens
After data collection, each researcher first separately analyzed and coded 20 unique threads.
Following a constructivist grounded theory approach [ 30], we iteratively developed our coding
scheme together as we found common and emergent themes. We used open coding to code the
restofthethreadswithourdevelopedcodebook,stoppingoncewereacheddatasaturation.Mem-
oingoccurredthroughout,andgeneratedcodeswerecontinuallyrefinedthroughaxialcoding.In
other words, when new codings arose that did not align with our current codebook, these codes
werediscussedandintegratedorrejectedintoourcodebook.Inlinewithconstructivistgrounded
theory’s maxim for researcher reflexivity, we note that our analysis was also backgrounded by
visual discourse analysis [ 77] whereby we unpack not only the content of visual imagery but the
mechanismsbywhichsuchimageryservestolegitimizeormarginalizecertainformsofphotogra-
phyanddolluse.Additionally,weactivelycommittedtoanempathicapproach[ 95]towardTDF’s
members, seeking to know them through their words and images and to convey what it is to be
theotherthroughourmemoing.
Aftersaturation,weidentifiedpracticeswiththedoll’sbodyasarichtopicofinterest.Ourinitial
memos revolved around the creative ways in which the body was co-constructed by members of
TDFtobecomemorethanjustaRealDoll.Employingdiscourseanalysis,thisco-constructionwas
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:10 N.M.Suet al.
achieved, reinforced, and validated through the discursive activities, both visual and textual, of
TDFmembers.Memosservedasthefoundationofourempiricalfindings,whichshedlightonthe
reportedanddepictedpracticesofRealDollsforumusers,aswellastheirmotivationsfordoingso.
3.3 Limitations
Ourresearchfocusesonmen’sinteractionswithandaroundRealDolls.Thedatawecollectedfrom
the“ABYSSCreations-RealDoll”forumwasexclusivelydedicatedtoRDsresemblingwomen.We
encountered few posts written explicitly by women and even fewer of women who identified as
activeusersofRDs.Somepostsweencounteredmentionedwomenbutwereofteninthecontext
of men mentioningtheirpartners.
This article does not specify demographics on posters. Posters in TDF can opt to list demo-
graphic information (e.g., location, occupation, website) in their profile but this requires creating
an account. Because this added level of security implies a concern for profile privacy (accounts
are to be viewed only within a “community”), we decided to not report this information as users
might not expect their demographic data to be collated and analyzed. While we have no way to
verifywithcertaintythegenderofposters,basedonthedescribedusesofRDs,posters’language
about themselves, and the key market for RDs, we are confident that the majority of posts in our
datasetwerewrittenby heterosexualcisgenderedmen.
Women’s voices are largely missing in this study. However, women are significant consumers
of sex toys and products [ 7]. Additionally, other forums on TDF such as “Boy Toy Dolls” are ded-
icated to male RDs manufactured by ABYSS Creations and may include more diversity in terms
of sexual orientationand gender,but we focusedon thedominant heterosexualcisgendered male
voicein“ABYSSCreations-RealDoll.”Weacknowledgethatthischoiceomitsanalreadyminority
voice in the forum and envision that future work will, for instance, focus on women’s or LGBTQ
experiences with RDs, which may (or may not) suggest different requirements and expectations
of embodied,intimatetechnologies.
AnotherconcernisthedemographicdiversityoftheRDsintheimagesofourdataset.Thishas
implications on whether our analysis only reflects a small swath of intimate possibilities. We at-
temptedtoanalyzeallthedollimagesinourdataset,butwefounditdifficultandpotentiallyprob-
lematic to categorize, for example, the race or age of the dolls. Moreover, since posters modified
dollsviamakeup,clothes,wigs,andsoon,itwasimpossibletoaccuratelyidentifycharacteristics
likesize.Duetotheseissuesandthefactthatimagespostedwereoftenphotoshopped,eventrying
to identifydolls in photoswiththecatalogof availablemodels wasinfeasible.
However, we can limit our examination of demographics to the types of dolls sold by Abyss
Creations.2As detailed in Table 1, Abyss offers a wide range of Real Doll options. The dolls are
diverseinthecontextofallowingcustomerstochoosefromanumberofskin,hair,andeyecolors
as well as nipple and hair styles. The doll face options seem to cover a wide range of races and
ethnicities(Figure 1).Theaveragewaistsize(M =23.7”,SD =1.4”)oftheofferedRDbodyshapes
is considerably smaller than that of an average American woman (AWW). The AWW wears be-
tweenaMissessize16–18,whichisequivalenttoaWoman’sPlussize20W(37.5/prime/primewaistsize)[ 32].
Accordingto theAmerican Centersfor DiseaseControland Prevention (CDC),theaverage waist
size for adult American women aged 20 or older is 38.1” [ 39]. The average waist-hip ratio (WHR)
of the dolls is 0.68 (SD =0.04). Studies have identified a WHR of 0.7 as more attractive to men in
Westerncultures[ 84].
Overall, the choices of dolls—all able bodied with small waists and lower WHR—arguably
conform to male-centered heteronormative standards of sexual attractiveness. These standards
2https://www.realdoll.com .
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:11
Table 1. ABYSSReal Doll options(as of August2018).
Type Height Cupsize Waist Hip
Body A 5’3” 33C 24” 35”
Body B 5’1” 32C 23” 32”
Body C 5’10” 34A 24” 34”
Body D 5’6” 36DD 24” 38”
Body E 5’1” 32B 23” 36”
Body F 5’1” 32F 24” 37”
Petite3 4’10” 32B–32C 22” 32”
Petite4 4’10” 32DD 22” 36”
Petite5 4’10” 32A 22” 32”
Body AA 5’2” 32C 24” 34”
Body AB 5’6” 34D 26” 36.5”
Body JD 5’9” 34B 25” 37”
Body KL 4’11” 32B 25” 34”
Body LF 4’11” 30B 21” 31.5”
Body SD 5’7” 36DD 26” 36.5”
Body SS 5’8” 34DD 24” 36”Bodypart Basiccolors
Skin Cocoa,Fair,Light Tan,
Medium,Tan
Eye Blue,Brown,Hazel,
Green
Haircolor Light Blonde,Medium
Blonde,Strawberry,
Red,Cinnamon,
Auburn,Brunette,
Black,Light Brown
Fig. 1. Real Doll faces (as of August2018).
reflect the views of the “sexually privileged” that promulgate sex as a means of enjoyment but
nonethelessreservesthathonorfor“normal”formsofsex,not“unnatural,”minorityformsofsex
[65,p.53–55].Whilewebelievethatmanyoftherequirementsforintimate,embodiedexperiences
with artifacts have aspects shared across all users, future work needs to go beyond the sexually
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:12 N.M.Suet al.
privileged. This is not only for the sake of equity, but also for the sake of better design: Seibers
notes how some sex toy designers have designed for disabled bodies and that such innovations
have historicallyalso ledto significantbenefitsforable bodiedindividualsas well [ 83,p.132].
Lastly, our findings are limited by our observations of owners on the public online forum. We
havenoknowledgeofpractices“behind”thescenesintheprivacyoftheirhomes,andthuscannot
claim with certainty that our results are representative of Real Doll owners. In particular, we are
unable to comment on the ethical issues regarding edge cases (e.g., physically abusing dolls) of
usingRealDolls [ 85] becausetheywerenot observedandwereprohibitedontheforum.
4 DOLLS AS CONTENT AUTHORING INTERFACE
One of the ways that we hope to bring Real Dolls owner practices back to HCI is to relate these
practices to research agendas in HCI. One of these is content authoring, a research and develop-
mentagendathathasfordecadesconcerneditselfwithsupportingusersastheyproducecontent.
In the 1980s, that meant text editors, but by the mid-2000s HCI researchers were looking at ever-
moresophisticatedmultimediaauthoringtools.WeargueherethatoneofthewaysthatRealDolls
extend beyond theirputativepurposeassexappliancesis bysupportingcontentcreation.
Weare only “playthings”fortheseDolls,
Theyhavetheirown lives.
Howdid sheunhookherselfoffthehanger?
Howdoes anydoll do whattheydo?
Theysimply dowhattheywant—we justfollow along withthem.
—Poemfragment from[P98]
Each of these quotes attributes agency to the dolls, which includes both the ability to form
intention(“dowhattheywant”)aswellastoactonit.Seeingthedollsinthiswayrequiresskilled
creativelabor fromtheirowners.
4.1 Dolls as Skilled Creative Labor
FormembersofTDF,thedollisaplatformuponwhichcreativeendeavorscanflourish.RealDoll
owners construct dolls as subjects whose bodies inhabit and make sense of the world, as real
humansdo.Ownersuseasetofskilledcreativepracticestocraftdollsassubjects.Thesepractices
involve imagination, physical engagement with the doll, and applying an understanding of the
ways thatwomen exist in theworld.
4.1.1 Springboards for Mundane Imaginations. Significantly, owners’ visual (i.e., photo series)
and textual (i.e., posts) discourse provides a means to show that dolls are not merely sex toys or
objectsforphysicalgratification.
Let’s assume that the experience of sex really starts and ends in your head. Al-
though the warmth of a RD’s silicone is spectacular, sex with a RD is more than
justphysical.Awonderfulfantasy willalwaysbesta middling reality.[P6]
RDsarenotmerelysexualappliances.Yourphotoseriesinfactdemonstrateswhat
makesRDsso special:they’respringboardsfor theimagination.[P40]
I have a real relationship with my dolls. Yes, it is an artificial, but a relationship
nonetheless.EverythingthatIdo—thepositioning,touching,sexorlove-making—
iswhatanyonewoulddowithawoman.Ifyoucanacceptthisand“play”doll,sex
transitionsfromsomethinggoodto somethingyou’llnever give up.[P6]
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:13
Fig. 2. Desireereading andopening acurtain.
Here, the springboard is an analogy to physical world sex: the Real Doll is a representation of a
real sexual partner. Yet this analogy has its limits. In P2, it is explained that though a Real Doll
could notcompletelyreplacea relationship,thelevelto whichit couldapproximate one
...dependsonyourimaginationandthe“play”effortyou’rewillingtodevote.As
withotherillusionsthatcommand ourlives, youget whatyou putin.[P2]
Theconceptsofillusion,imagination,andplaysuggestsomethingalittlebitdifferentthanliterally
recreatingtraditionalsex.P6 expandswitha metaphor:
We construct an intoxicating fantasy using this doll as our main “prop”; you are
boththe“movie studio” andtheaudience.[P6]
Nowowneranddollarenolongersexpartners;instead,theownerisbothproducerandaudience,
and thedollisan actress.
How these fantasies are created is subject to the owner’s own experiences, desires, and skills.
Yet, they are also subject to the norms of TDF and society at large within which doll owners are
inscribed.Itiswithintheseconstraintsthatdollownerscancreativelyproducetheirown“movies.”
Owners described using their imagination to construct explicitly sexual fantasies but also ro-
mantic and even mundane fantasies in ways that differ from standard pornographic encounters.
Owners posed dolls and then posted pictures depicting activities such as reading books. Some
went to considerable lengths to engage the dolls in these seemingly humdrum activities, such as
attaching a curtain to a window frame (Figure 2). These realistic, everyday contexts affected the
lifelikenessof thedoll: “Wow,sheseemsrealinyourcar! [P181]”
Doll owners collaboratively, and even competitively, created rich and innovative stories about
Real Dolls. One type of collaborative storymaking was sorting and collecting doll pictures that
hadbeenpreviouslyposted,accordingtoanewmetric.Forexample,oneposterwrote: “Wedesire
[the dolls] to be alive. We wish them to be acting like a realgirl or at least close by to us in every
situation. So, naturally, our RDs have experienced many means of transportation.” The poster then
uploadedseveralpicturesoftheirowndollandasked “HowaboutyourRDs
 ?[P95]”Manyposters
respondedwithpicturesthattheyhadpreviouslytakenoftheirdollsonvariousmeansoftransport
(Figure3). Some recast pictures that did not have to do with transportation in this new light, for
instance, saying that a doll lying on an electric blanket was on a “flying electric blanket,” or that
“legs”shouldbeconsideredamodeoftransportation,accompaniedbyapictureofadollinlingerie
standing.
Thoughdollsandsextoysaresometimesthoughtofasasolitaryhobbybetweenownerandsex
toy,TDFisaforumwheredollsarejointlyconstructedassubjects.Onthisforum,therelationship
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:14 N.M.Suet al.
Fig. 3. Two separateposts:Dollon car andridingalawnmower.
withthedollismadepublicandlegitimate.Tosomeextent,thisintimacy(asKokoschkatheartist
felt [85]) can only be achieved by treating their dolls as a natural, fluid part of one’s world. This
naturalnessandfluidity howeverisachievedthroughsignificantwork.
4.1.2 Performing Femininity. InadditiontoimaginativeworkputintoconstructingaRealDoll,
owners engaged in planning and daily maintenance. One poster likened their labor in arranging
and positioningthedolltothedaily self-careactivitiesof women.
Youare in charge of a woman’s creativity: you will choose her wardrobe, acces-
sories,dress(andundress)her,smoothoutherhair,keephercleansedandmadeup,
pose her seductively, and create her vocal script. We’d certainly notice if women
didn’tputthiseffortforall ofus![P6]
For a powerful, intoxicating fantasy to occur, the owner must learn and apply creative skills that
involvelearningtostylehair,positioningbodiestobeliesexuality,andselectingoutfits—working
withthephysicalrealitiesofthebody(e.g.,limbrange)thatrequireworkaroundsandconsultation
withothersintheforum.Inpostingphotographs,theownermayengageintechnicalworkediting
imagesandshareorseekadviceonmakingdollslookrealistic.Akeyelementofthiscreativework
is engaging with what a “real” woman—a particular construction of a real woman—looks, acts,
dresses,and even soundslike.
More often than not the doll was shown doing tasks that are traditionally seen as “feminine.”
For example, in Figure 11the doll is standing in front of the dining table. She is doing laundry
with a pile of clothes on the table for her to fold. Comments often allude to dolls “cooking and
cleaning,” liking“clothesand shoes,”“gettingherbeautyrest,”and eatingchocolate.
Thesiteofthesecreativeactsisthedoll—tangible,physicalobjects.Crucially,RealDollsarenot
merely objects to be manipulated. Rather, they become, as Merleau-Ponty [ 67]s a y s ,e n v e l o p e d
with the user. They are a lived-in body that acts with intention and inhabits the environment.
Thus,owners maketheRealDollinto abody throughwhichtheycan experiencetheworld.
Dollsarenotsexobjectsbutanentityto “spendtimewith...layinginbedwat chingTV,tryingdif-
ferentoutfitsonher,andtakingphotos.Eventhoughwedon’thavesexeverynight,wedosleeptogether
every night.” These phrases— “spend time with,” “trying different outfits,” “sleep[ing] together” —are
activities withthe doll. In the owner’s subjective experience, the doll does not have actions done
on her. By demarcating the actions that the member does with the doll, they also demarcate the
actionsthatthedolldoes—thatshehasherownstanceandexperiencestheworldtoo.Thedollis
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:15
Fig.4. Unboxing areal doll.
framedbytheownerasabodywithagency.Hereagain,wespeculatethatthisfindingappliesfar
morebroadlythanwithsexdolls,anditanticipateswhatwillbecommonhumaninteractionswith
robots.Specifically,experiencesthatarisefromanthropomorphizationmightcometooutweigha
robot’sintendedfunctionality,narrowlyconstrued.
Inpart,RealDollsposeacreativechallengethatownersrelish—toworkwiththerestrictionsof
itsbodyformtocreatesomethingthatisbothuniqueandalluring.Dolluserswantherto “appear
real,justasarealwomanmightlooksimilartoanotherwoman,butneverexactlythesameasanother.
She has her own, unique self. [P64]” We now to turn to examining how members carry out their
creative endeavors and how these creative endeavors not only enrich their own lives with their
dolls buthelpstoinspireandfeed eachother’s (realfantasy)lives withdolls.
4.2 Doll as Materializing Social Conventions
RealDollspresentanopportunityforownerstoimbuetheirdolls’bodieswithagency.Byworking
withthebody,ownersareabletomaketheirdollsunique.Likerealhumans,dollshavetheirown
look and personality. Members of TDF talked about a number of ways to customize their dolls.
Some practicesparallelsthoseof women,while othersgo beyond.
4.2.1 Living Femininity in Dead Weight. Dollsareshippedinlargewoodencrateboxes.Akinto
iPhone“unboxing” videosonYouTube,unboxingpicturesonTDFportraythesenseofanticipation
andjoyinthearrivaloftheirdolls(seeFigure 4).Ownersoftencelebratedtheirdoll’sanniversary—
that is, when their dolls were acquired: “You will never forget this moment of struggling with that
behemothcrate,opening itand exclaiming,‘Wow!’[P154]”
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:16 N.M.Suet al.
Fig.5. Face IDs 18 (left)and 14(right).
Posters also purchased used dolls. Revealingly, some doll owners call this “adopting” a doll: “If
you really want a Real Doll, adopting might be a good alternative. When I adopted Ally in 2013 she
wasalmostfouryearsold.Shewasmadein2009.Icouldn’taffordanewdoll,soonlyadoptionworked
for me. I bought her for under $3000. She was well cared by the previous doll owner ...Iadoptedher
forphotographyactivities.Ihaveotherdollsforplaytime.[P297]” Basedonourdata,adoptdoesnot
suggest incest but, rather, infantilizes the doll as something that must be taken care of (we will
comment on thislater).
Dolls arrive with no clothing (unless specifically ordered). Owners can customize dolls when
they place their order. Indeed, as when researching any potential purchase, this is a source of
muchconversationontheforum.Wefocushereononeparticularissue:the “bodypartIDs.” Asan
example,oneposterlistedthedifferentmeasurementsofeachbodytype.Here,welistthe “petite”
and“voluptuous” model:
Body4;USDresssize4,X-Small;Brasize32AA;Shoesize7;Height4’10”;Measure-
ments (over breast, waist, hip) 30”–23”–33”; Weight 77lb / 35.1kg; Description—
Petite
Body 8; US Dress size 8, Small/Medium; Bra size 34B; Shoe size 8; Height
5’7”; Measurements (over breast, waist, hip) 36”–26”–37”; Weight 106lb / 47.9kg;
Description—Voluptuous
A number of threads detail lengthy deliberations over exactly what kind of body and face IDs to
purchase.Eachbodytypesatisfiesdifferentpreferences.Body8 “haslargehipsbutjustBcupbreasts
although body 5 has huge tits but smaller hips. [P99]” The Real Doll company allows people to get
“breastaugmentationforanextracharge.But,Ibelieveyoucanonlygouponecupsize.[P134]” Forum
membersoftenidentifythemselveswiththeirdoll’sIDs: “InamedmineJody.Jodyisabody5and
face11combo.[P174]” Here,thedesignofaRealDollsoundslikeastrangeblendingofconfiguring
a laptop before buying it and playing with a Mr. Potato Head. The language is objectifying in
multiple sensesof theword.
But, the languages changes somewhat when owners talk about the different faces available.
Figure5showsdifferentfacesusedbydollspostedbymembersofTDF.Thesemembersextolthe
virtuesof theRealDollbrand andtheirfacechoices:
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:17
Fig. 6. Naturalmakeup (left) vs.eyeshadow andlipstickapplied (right).
The most important thing about the face is whether it looks lifelike. Does it have
a“soul”?Idon’twantalookthatisblankandbereftoflife.It’snotthathardtoget
thelookyouwant,butyoumusttomaketherightchoices.Forgetthehooplaabout
its silicone and skeletons. This is thereason why RD is top notch—the wonderful
senseof life thattheirdolls possess.[P64]
The“senseoflife” ortheideaofadollhavinga “soul”ispartofwhatdistinguishesRealDollsfrom
itscompetitors,andit outweighsthetechnicalfeatures.
Intheirunboxedstate,dollsaredeadweight,butownersareabletoassumetheroleofafemale,
putting on clothes, wigs, and makeup to alter their experiences. Some dolls come with minimal
makeupapplied(e.g.,eyeliner).OnTDF,ownersexchangeadviceonapplyingandusingmakeup.
As one owner says, “Certainly, the face is important but I think the ‘variability’ of any doll’s face
depends on the makeup, hair color and style, and the lighting conditions under which the photos are
taken. [P64]” For maximum customizability, owners can purchase a doll with “natural makeup” :
“ThatwayIcanchangetheirappearancewheneverIwish.[P126]” Rhondaisshownontheleft-side
of Figure 6with natural makeup; on the right-side Rhonda has had eye shadow, lipstick, and nail
polishapplied.
Discourse about makeup revolves around the materiality of the doll. The doll’s skin is made of
silicone,asubstancenotoriouslyreticentintakingupothermaterials.OnTDF,membersobserve
that polish does not stick onto silicone; as a workaround doll owners attach fake nails first and
thenapplynailpolishtothefakenails.Inthesamethread,aposternotesthat “eyelinerpencilsare
useless”:
Zoe has light brown eyeliner and natural eyeshadow which is almost invisible.
Liquideyelinersworkwell,eyelinerpencilsareuseless,whilepowdereyeshadow
is easilyappliedwithasmall brush.It paintsdirectly ontothesilicone.[P126]
Membersmustsmartlycombinetechniquesofrealwomen(thediscoursealmostreadslikeabeauty
magazine) withthematerialityofthedoll’sbodies.Oneposterenlistedhisadultdaughter,abud-
ding cosmetologist, to help him apply makeup to his doll (P16). A female member of TDF recom-
mends a makeup application book by Kevyn Aucoin, a prominent American makeup artist: “His
booksare anexcellent lessononthefemaleface,and onchangingitthroughmakeup.”
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:18 N.M.Suet al.
Fig.7. Doll with temporarytattoo.
Whiletheapplicationofmakeupnecessitatesanunderstandingofthematerialityofdolls,own-
ersbelieveitalsonecessitatesanunderstandingofwomen.Below,aposterasksthatthedollowner
imagine wearing the clothes themselves to assess their potential damage to the doll. This excerpt
describes both a concern with an embodied experience with the doll and the materiality of the
doll’s bodyitself:
Immediately remove anything that could leave marks on the skin. Clothes are al-
ways a problem. Use them sparingly for when taking pictures, otherwise, dolls
don’tmindbeingstorednaked.Avoidembroideryandsequins,hardstuffandpat-
terns.Imaginewhatitwouldbeliketowearandposewithitforalengthyperiod
of time. Avoid things that aren’t comfortable for yourself. For example, neither
you nor the dolly wants to sit for hours on a zipper. The risk of damage increases
quickly within a short time. Sitting on a zipper might leave marks on the skin
withinafew minutes.Thismarkmay ormay not bepermanent.[P90]
Weseecomplexlayersofidentificationanddisidentification.Wesawearliertheobjectifyinglan-
guage of the dolls’ part numbers, how the owner was like a film producer and audience to his
doll/movie star, and how silicone is different from human skin—these are all disidentifications.
But now we also see identifications: “imaginewhatitwouldbeliketowear...it” and“neither you
nor the dolly wants to sit for hours on a zipper.” The identification also implies a gender switch,
where the man is literally like the doll, and also where men share makeup application tips like
female-written andorientedbeautyarticles.
Inanotherthread,membersdiscussadding “realisticoreven*real*tattoosonadoll’sskin.[P302]”:
I personally would nottry tattooing your doll. It’ll hurt its silicone skin and the
resultswon’tbeasgoodasyouexpected.Thesiliconeskinofadollhasadifferent
texture than human skin. My girls like to have tattoos, but the temporary kinds
thatdon’t hurtto get.[P302]
Whatisinterestingaboveisthatthoughtattoosareoftenthoughtofaspermanentmarkersonthe
skin, members express skepticism of doing a “real”(i.e., permanent) tattoo. Figure 7depicts the
kind of temporarytattoos(purchasedonAmazon) membersappliedon dolls.
4.2.2 Standing on Their Own. SignificantactivityonTDFisdedicatedtotheproblemofposing
dolls. A major challenge for many owners is the sheer heft of the dolls. In thread P14, a poster
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:19
Fig. 8. Foamrollers toprotect adollduringstorage.
mentionsnotlooking “forwardtolifting100+lbs.” Anotherlovesthe “detail,finishing,andrealism
of the RD, but I just can’t handle the 78 pounds. [P52]” Indeed,“[t]hese beauties are not light even to
be tossedaround.[P122]” P99 gives somesage adviceto apotentialpurchaserof a RealDoll:
As a newbie, you need to face the facts, or specs. Weight is a big thing with these
dolls.TheB10isheavyatawhopping112lbs.andis5’5”tall.Those39”hipspack
onthepounds.TheB1ontheotherhandhas34”hips,1”taller,andweight96lbs.
TheB7isverypopularat85lbs.butitisaBcup,5’3”tall,andhas33”hips.16lbs.
canfeellikeabigdifferencewhengettingtothe100lbs.mark,but27lbs.willfeel
even bigger.
Some owners store their dolls on furniture in their homes. However, this storage, whether on
thebedoronachaircanleadtodamage. “Flatteningofthedoll’sbuttwillbenoticeableandcanbe
avoidedbynotleavingthedollsittinginachairtoolong...thedollmustbetreatedasdelicatelyas
glass. [P90]” Any pressure on these “flat spots [P174]” will potentially cause permanent deforma-
tions in the doll’s silicone. Figure 8shows one solution—using foam rollers on a bed underneath
thedoll.
Posing dolls is of vital concern to doll owners. If dolls are to become companions, their bodies
mustnavigatetheworldnaturally.Tohavethedollmovetoperformsexualactsisrelativelyeasy
in the“standard,” missionary style act. However, RD bodies must comport to do everyday tasks
that reflect everyday living. By posing the bodies in these important, sometime mundane, tasks,
owners give their dolls a sense of vibrancy and intention. The visual capture of these movements
allow ownersto sharethisvibrancy.
Dollsareabletostandontheirownbutneedtobestabilized.Figure 9showsLina,a120lbReal
Dollstandingagainstadesk.Thisisoneoftherarecasesinourdataofasiliconedollstandingon
her own. However, this sort of posture looks unnatural to some and may damage the hands (due
toexcessiveweightonthehands).Toaccomplishmorefluidmovements,RDusersrigupvarious
contraptionsofwhichthemostutilizedisthe stand.RDshaveaboltintheirneckthatallowsitto
connectto thesestands.Thestandsarealso calledstancemodifiers:
I invented the “stance stand” so that I could photograph Clara Miller from any
angle without having to later resorting to photoshopping out the stand and back
support. The beauty of the stance stand is that the girl can have a natural stance
on stairs, for example without the need for something to push her back to keep
herupright.[P92]
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:20 N.M.Suet al.
Fig.9. RealDoll stabilized againsta deskwith owner.
Fig. 10. Real Doll stands.
SchematicsforbuildingyourownstandcanbefoundonTDF;partsareeasilyobtainedatlocalUS
hardwarestoreslikeHome Depot.Figure 10showsexamples of stands.
Not only do members of TDF share tips on constructing stands, they also describe how to hide
the stand for more realistic photos. Creative positioning can help occlude the stand (Figure 11).
Mostpopular,however,istoPhotoshopawaythestand(Figure 12).Ontheright,Figure 12shows
adollwhosebodyisengagingwitheverydayactivity,ahobbyofguitarplaying.Usingastandand
then applying Photoshop or occlusion techniques lets the doll engage with the world unencum-
bered.
Posters also worked on photographic techniques, praised other users for their skill in dressing
and positioningdolls andeditingphotographs:
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:21
Fig.11. A Real Doll stand occluded.
Fig. 12. Real Doll standsphotoshopped away.
Woah.Sheis**so**sexy.YourskillsinphotographyareSOamazing,atthispoint
you arequitethepro.
Your pictures have great lighting, I love to see how you are growing as a photog-
rapherand I can’twait toseeyourwork astime goeson!
I love thisworkyou’vedone.It bringsheralive! Greatjob! [P121]
Theoneswhohadpostedthephotoswereoftenappreciativeofthepraiseandaskedforinput:
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:22 N.M.Suet al.
...justtellmeifyouwantsomethingdifferent,ihadalotoffundoingthislastset,
i do them for all of you because i want to keep this dream alive, the dream i had,
whichis nowa realityand fantasythathascome alive.[P39]
UsingDIYrigsandpost-processing,ownersrelishedthechancetofindinventiveandskillfulways
to bestowdolls anembodied lifewiththem.
4.2.3 The Gaze of Dolls. Whilethepositioningoftheoverallbodygarnersmostspace,owners
alsofindwaystoarticulatethebodytoachieverealism.Whenshipped,thedoll’sfaceisrelatively
immobile. Below a memberdiscussesturningthedoll’s head:
Your doll should have the ability to turn the head and hold this pose to an ex-
tent, but she can’t hold the pose in some positions (like looking over or past her
shoulder).Ifshecan’t,tightenthejointof thenecklike[otherposter]said.[P91]
The role of gazeis important for the dolls and their presentation in the forum. Research in film
studies [19] focuses on the gaze as a primary source of pleasure in cinema, distinguishing among
three different gazes: that of the camera operator gazing at the actors (the pro-filmic gaze); that
ofthecharacterswithinthestorygazingateachother(thediegeticgaze);andthatoftheviewers
gazing at thefilm(thespectatorgaze).
All three are operational with these photos. The pro-filmic gaze is not only accessible to us by
means of the photographs themselves, but also in the posters’explanations of why and how they
constructedtheimagesastheyhave.Thediegeticgazeismateriallydifficulttoachieve—thedolls
arestiffandthisthreatenstobreaktheillusionofthesituationdepictedinthephoto.Thethreads
below make it clear that effort spent on improving the dolls’ gaze are key to establishing a “sense
ofsentience”:
Ihavehadahardtimegettingtheeyesindifferentpositions,butthisisneededto
give that sense of sentience that we are trying to find in our photography. I have
found it helpful to use the end of a pencil eraser to prod and poke the eyes to the
rightplace.[P133]
I...chosetomovetheeyessotheylookofftothesidejustalittlebittoavoidthe
two-thousand-yard-stare that dolls without movable eyes have. So, like a lot of
people,shewillnaturallyhave aside thatlooksbetterin photographs.[P38]
Aconvincingdiegeticgazeispresentedasanaestheticachievement,anditisviewedassuchwithin
the spectactorial gaze. For example, in Figure 13, we see Jaiden apparently gazing adoringly into
theeyesoftheforummember.Jaiden,writesoneviewer, “lookslikeaRG[realgirl],lookingstraight
intoyoureyes![P162]” Thediegeticscenehascometolifeinthespectator’sgaze.Onecriterionofa
successfulphoto,then,iswherethepro-filmic,diegetic,andspectatorialgazesareallinalignment:
the view offered by the photo effectively presents the diegetic gaze, which brings the narrative
characterstolife in theeyesand minds of thespectatorsontheforum.
Another thread describes how removing the eye from the Real Doll and inserting a dowel can
allow the eyes to be articulated (Figure 14):“The eyes aren’t solid and open in the rear. So I fixed
a wood dowel with silicone in the eye and then cut out openings. Now I can move the eyes with my
fingers.Ishavedthedoweltoallowmetomovetheeyeawiderrange.[P172]” Aswiththestand,the
eyes further signal that the doll inhabits its space around it, acting with intent, rather than being
lifeless.Otherpostersrespondedwithtechniquestoapplylubetomakeeyeseasiertomove,using
suctioncupsordartsfromnerfguns,prostheticeyeremovers,photoshoptoaltertheeyeposition
after the picture was taken, and cutting some material out of the face and applying dowels to the
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:23
Fig. 13. Agaze andthenakiss.
Fig.14. Hacked eye with dowel (left),backof head with hacked eyes (right).
eyeballs.Thepostersnotedthetechniquesthatweremorechallengingorinvolvedmoreskill,and
the individual who posted the dowel technique (Figure 14) acknowledged that “Lubricant is still
the easiest. [P133]” Throughout this section, we again see the oscillation between doll-as-subject
(thegaze and itsmeanings) and doll-as-object(manipulatingtheeyes).
5 CONSTRUCTING MEANINGFUL, SEXUAL RELATIONSHIPS
On first glance, Real Dolls are inflexible, inanimate objects. However, we have shown that users
vividly and creatively scaffold their dolls to create a reality where dolls are subjects with agency.
Here,itisalsoinstructivetoexaminethatwhiledollsareconstructedassubjects,dollusers them-
selvesareconstructedassubjects.Inotherwords,theparticularwaysinwhichdollsareconstructed
assubjectsrevealsmuchabouthowusersseethemselves.Forinstance,byseekingalifecompan-
ion,usersimplicitly framethemselvesas more thansex-hungry,objectifyingsubjects.
Thistacitconstructionofdollsassubjectsoftheirownexperiences(e.g.,havingavoice,inten-
tions,aperspective)andassubjectedtotheirneeds(e.g.,theneedtoprovidetoreceivecareandthe
need for self-expression and actualization) is done because owners downplay the asymmetry of
theirrelationship.LikePrometheus,ownerswanttoempowerdollswiththeabilitytoexperience
the world—while these experiences seem fabricated, they are, as shown in Section 4, subjectively
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:24 N.M.Suet al.
experienced as real because the bodies of dolls fluidly participate with their owners’ everyday
practices. The dolls’ apparent reciprocation of feelings and desires give their owners great satis-
faction. Qualities of emotional reciprocity, apparent participation, and implied symmetry appear
tobedesignimplicationsoftheseresults—thoughtheethicsofthesequalitiesareclearlycomplex.
Sexual intimacy is important to many relationships. And, indeed, the dolls have been designed
byAbyssCreationsassexualbeings.Themobilityofdollsisrestrictedfromthemomenttheyare
conceived.Apostermoreconcernedaboutusingthedollforphotos(P168)asks, “Whydodollslook
like they’re laying an egg when they stand?” The explanation is that “[T]he dolls are manufactured
tobepartlyseated.FromwhatIknow,thispreventsthemfromstrainingduringsex.Manydollshave
aneckboltwhichshiftstheirweightsuchthattheytendtoleanforward.” Thispurposeful,physical
deformityofthedoll’sbodygivesitits“bow-legged”appearanceinservitudetoitssexualfunction.
Thedollthussacrificesmobilityforsexualfunction,butthebow-leggednesscomestomeanmore
thanmerefunctionality;theirsexualfunctionalityatleastinthisregardcompromisestheirbeauty.
While explicit sexual acts or stories were rare on the forum (as mentioned in Section 3.1,T D F
prohibits photography of owners having sex with dolls), discussions often turned to the doll’s
sexual performance. Specifically, the doll is constructed as a sexual subject. We emphasize that a
sexualsubjectcanalsobeaboutconstructingmeaningfulrelationships.Objectificationofthebody
is an act people carry out in real relationships and everyday activities. For instance, power and
dominationarekeyelementsofmanyintimaterelationships[ 11].Whileitmayseemparadoxical,
asexualsubjectisonewhohasthefreedomtosuspendtheirownagencytosatisfythesexualuser.
The doll as sexual subject has an unequaled sexual prowess. For example, the potential for the
doll togive oral sexlikea machineis oftenalluded to:
To be honest - I keep Sandra around because this doll can suck the bricks off a
c h i m n e y .I fy o ut a k et h i sf a c ea n dp u ti to na5b o d yy o u ’ l lg e tas e xb o tt h a tc a n
contributedaysof oralstimulation.[P58]
In thread P90, a discussion of materiality arises but around the durability of the doll due to the
continued stress of sex: “I’ve heard that the vagina can be a too tight with a new doll. But owners
tell me that it does slowly expand due to constant stretching over time.” In a thread about wigs for
dolls, an owner specifically notes what is for posing (i.e., “artistic” photos) and what is for sex:
“The goldenrule is:long wigsare forposingbut shortwigsare for play![P88]”
Storiesofhackingcanbeaboutmaximizingsexualperformance.Here,apostercreativelyusesa
fleshlight.Again,notethehallmarksofpreviousdiscourse—concernsaboutdamage,goingbeyond
theRealDoll’sbody,andtheways dolls may bebetterthanthe “realdeal.”
I sliced a substantial piece from a fleshlight and got it into the vagina of my real
doll. It’s incredible and I honestly am unsure if anything can compete with this,
asidefromthe“realdeal.”Ithoughtitmightstretchoutthevaginalopeningbutit
didn’t.I left theedge of thefleshlightout soit didn’t get mashed upinside. When
Ifinished,thepiececame outwithno damage to my RD atall. [P72]
Theclinicalmannerinwhichowners“operate”ondollssubjectsthedolltoobjectification.Thissort
ofobjectificationhasparallelstothewaysdoctorsandnurseslearntohaveemotionaldetachment
byobjectifyingpatientsandtheirbodies[ 59].However,justasdollownerswouldemphasize,emo-
tional detachment is not a strategy to create a callous person. Instead, this detachment serves to
allowdoctors(analogoustodollowners)toaccuratelyunderstandandempathizewithsomeone’s
emotions[ 55].Thus,whilethedetachedmannerinwhichownersplaydoctorandtreattheirdolls
mayonfirstglanceseemcold,whenseenintheguiseofdetachedconcern,theseactionsactually
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:25
represent a pragmatic form of care by owners that seeks the most effective, risk-free procedures
for theirdolls.
ComparisonsofRealDollandthe“realdeal,”andoftenwhatarereferredtoas“realgirls,”come
up on this forum. Women, “the real deal,” serve as a creative resource for owners; the needs and
intentions of real women is a design material that owners project and perform with Real Dolls
to create a live woman with her own needs and ability to fulfil her desires. More specifically,
thisnewfoundexistence—onewithagency—dependsonthemanipulationofherowners.Another
posterexplainedthatRealDollsare actuallysuperiorin somesense:
I would actually say, “A real woman has the ABILITY to deliver more satisfaction
andpleasurethanadollcan.”ButwhetheragivengirlwillDELIVERonthatability
is adifferent thing.[P122]
Unlike real girls, dolls can always deliver on their potential as it is the owner who brings that
potentialto fulfillment.
5.1 Personas of Sex
When Real Dolls are interpreted and presented in a sexual situation, there are certain ways that
the dolls (putatively) stylize or perform their sexual desires. In other words, there are an infinite
number of ways that the Real Dolls could be constructed as sexual beings, but they are actually
constructedinparticularways.
Dolls are not simply sex objects: they are sexually desirable, but they are also themselves inter-
ested in sex. Intrinsic physical qualities of the dolls were interpreted as signaling desire for sex.
Pictures where the doll’s skin was shiny due to the silicone were described as “wet and moan-
ing. [P93]” Dolls were frequently photographed in poses that implied that they were pleasuring
themselves. With another pose, an owner explained that “RDs are open and ready. [P73]” Owners
constructed the desiring doll for other owners: “Gotta scurry as Lucy is getting frisky again
 .
[P149]”Here,itis theownerwhois beingsubjectedto Lucy’sdesiresand sexualinitiations.
In addition to the desiring persona (also often seen in pornography), dolls were constructed as
havingaplayfully mischeviousside.Inone “unboxing” story,a posterwrites:
The most beautiful of the dolls removed her garment, and guided the fellow’s de-
scentintothebed...withthevoiceofaseraphshewhispered,“Let’splaysweetie!”
[P97]
Posters responded to pictures with descriptions of dolls as “a shade mischevious [P103]” and“not
totallynaive[P103],” ashavingan “aggressivedemeanor[P101]” that“bewitchesyou,butalsomakes
youconsiderhightailingit.[P101]”
InSection 4,wehighlightedhowownersformrichnarrativeswiththeirdollsonTDFthroughvi-
sualimageryandtextualstories.Thesenarrativessubjectdollstoalifethatsimultaneouslyweaves
themundanewithasexuallife.Forexample,scenesofdomesticityinFigures 2and3featuredolls
with skimpy outfits, underwear, lingerie, or nothing at all. The presence of genre scenes with
sexualized subjects again emphasizes that dolls, while sexualized, are part of the owners’ world.
Certainly,thesesexualpersonassubjectedbyownerstothedollsareinformedtosomedegreeby
traditionalpornographictropeswhichportraywomenasravenousandsubmissive.However,doll
owners often engage in particular pornographic tropes that may arguably be seen in a positive
light in whichtheir partnershave their own sexualdesires and preferences.In this sense,owners
maydrawnotsimplyonpornographictropes,butvisionsofwhatitmeanstohavearelationship,
to have a “girlfriend experience” [ 68]—experiences that include friendship, companionship, and
partnership.
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:26 N.M.Suet al.
5.2 Needing to Be Needed
WheneverIgetmydollfromoneroomtoanotherorgetherdressed—notatrivial
thing given how much she weighs—I feel as if I am engaging in an almost spiri-
tual practice, involving some sacrificing of myself for another. I am spending my
self, my time, my sweat, for this other entity, because this will give us time to be
together. She is not technically ”real,” but she is alive in my imagination and the
work I put in to taking care of her makes the whole thing feel even more real.
Seriously,everysingletimeIputineffortformydollIfallmoreinlove...[P89]
Earlier,wesawthatdollsserveasasexualcompanion.Certainlythisrolehelpsownersfulfillbasic
sexualneeds.But,moreimportantly,justassexispartofanyrelationship,theyfulfillthepsycho-
logical needs of owners. The quote above shows that many owners feel love for their dolls and
that this love is made more real by feeling needed. The owners “sacrifice” themselves, imagina-
tively toiling away to care for dolls in ways that are immensely satisfying. For owners there is a
cruciallinkbetweenwork—bothphysicalandmental—andtherelationshipwiththeRealDoll.In
thissense,theowners’effortsarereciprocated,physicallyand mentally,by thedolls.
Dolls were seen as vulnerable and in need of protection, both from physical harm and from
othermen’sgazes—the spectatorgaze. Oneposterexplained that:
Therealisticandgorgeousnatureofthesetopofthelinerealdollscausetheowner
toformabondtotherealdollsjustlikehecouldwitharealgirl.Ownersfrequently
speaktotheirdollsandinteractwiththemphysicallyinawaythatisbothdevoted
and respectful. Some won’t even post a naked picture of their doll. They can be
veryprotectiveoftheirdolls,andnotbecauseofthehighcostofgettingone!Like
astunningrealgirl,realdollsconnectwithsomethingthatisdeepdowninaman’s
subconscious...[P89]
The last part of this quote is emblematic of how dolls do not merely satiate instrumental sexual
needs.Theyaddressadeepneedto beneeded by theirowners.
Dolls,withtheirlife-like,expensive,andsophisticatedbodiesarethusanidealmediumbywhich
to give care and to receive the feeling of being wanted and, indeed, of being depended upon.
Engagingwithabodythatrequiresignificantcaregivingprovidesownerswiththeopportunityto
expresslove and devotion:
WhenIwasfirstthinkingaboutgettingarealdoll,Iknewthatsexwasnotreason
enoughtopurchaseone.Ilookedattherealdollforumandsawhowmuchworkit
istocareforadoll,Istoppedthinkingofthemasdollsandbegantoconsiderthem
helpless real girls. They need a well of dedication just like someone who cannot
move or communicatewhatsheneeds- and thatiswhyI got her.[P89]
Here, we see again the link between work—both physical and mental—and the relationship with
theRealDoll.In particular,imaginative work iskey forsatisfyingowners’needs.
In caring for dolls, owners became caregivers. In Figure 15, an owner is repairing his doll, and
using the opportunity to become her doctor. The owner finds meaning in giving more of himself
to take his doll from passive to active, if only in his mind. The doll must be passive for the owner
tocareforherinthisway—ifthedollcouldmoveherselffromroomtoroomanddressherself,the
relationshipwouldlookverydifferent.Thedollneedsamantoexist.Aswithanyintimatehuman
relationship,thereis apsychologicaldesire tofeelneededby theother.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:27
Fig. 15. Doll surgery.
6 DISCUSSION
Fromtheonset,wehavesuggestedthatRealDollsmayhintatthefutureofembodiedinteraction
withnewformsofintimateartifactssuchassexrobots.Academicandpopulardiscoursehaveboth
emphasizedtheinevitabilityofrobotsdesignedforsexualintercourse.Yet,thispredictiondoesnot
considerthe relationships peoplewill havewithrobotsbeyondmerely instrumentalsex.
Real Dolls are designed for sex, and users value the physical intimacy achieved with sexual
intercourse but also relate to dolls in ways that go far beyond sex. We have highlighted two key
aspects of this relationship with Real Dolls. First, Real Dolls support creative self-expression and
self-actualizationinhighlypersonalways.Thiscreationandreinforcementofpersonalrepertoires
ofintimaterelationshipsisdonewiththedollsthemselvesandthespaces,bothdigitalandphysical,
thatsurroundthedoll’sbodies.Theparticularfantasies,analogoustoembodiedintimatefictions,
enacted with dolls show that owners envision living with dolls in the world. Interaction through
TDFbetweenownersand,by proxy,dolls enrichestheseintimate interactions.
Second, users express themselves as subjects of, and subjected to, their dolls. This observation
highlights that owners on TDF express a need to be needed. This psychological desire has paral-
lelstomanyhealthy,real-liferelationships—manyofushaveadesiretofeelwanted.Thus,owners
want with dolls what people often want with their partners, sexual intimacy and long-term com-
panionship. And, just as people have specific likes and dislikes, owners enact particular intimate
fictionsofdolls,withintheconfinesofthediscoursesofintimacythatsurroundthemandthedoll
itself,totheirdesiresand thedoll’s desires.
We turn to discussing how these two key themes in our work point to new ways of thinking
aboutthedesign ofsexrobots.
6.1 Embodied Intimate Fictions
Real Dolls come alive not only because of their lifelike faces but also because of the imaginative
stories their owners construct and tell about them. The dolls become diegetic props. As we have
learnedfromresearchondesignfictions,diegesisreferstothefictionaluniversecreatedinastory.
Indesignfictions,diegetictechnologiesarerenderedplausiblebecausethecharactersoftheworld
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:28 N.M.Suet al.
interact with it, use it, and think about it [ 61]. In other words, it is the diegetic prototypes that
bringadesigntolife,andthereforetheyserveanimportantcognitivepurpose,helpingreadersto
understandthefictionalworldandalsoitsimplicationsforeverydaylife.Inasimilarsense,owners
useRealDollstocreateasortof embodiedintimatefiction .Textualnarratives,dollpersonalizations,
photographic poses, and doll modifications serve as a creative platform to create this fiction both
personallyandonline.Itbringsthedollstolife,butitisnotlimitedtothedolls:itbringsthewhole
worldofthedolls to life,allowing theowner toenterinto,experience,and tellothersaboutit.
Though these embodied fictions give depth to the experience of intimacy for each individual
owner, intimacy is not always a solitary endeavor. Just as in “real” relationships, the men in TDF
share stories about their lives with their doll partners with other men. These stories of intimacy
areproudlypostedonlineandthenheightenedthroughextendedconversationwithotherowners
and their dolls. Thus, these fictions are meant to be read, viewed, and—indeed—fantasized upon
furtherbyothers.
Moreover, as we move to sex robots, we need to consider that intimate fantasies are more per-
suasiveiftheyarecustomizable.AlthoughRealDollsdonotcomeininfiniteshapes,appearances,
nor sizes, customization begins at the online order form (cf. Section 3.3). To what extent will the
“basemodel”ofsexrobotsoffercustomization?Sexrobotsofferbothpossibilitiesthatlimitorex-
tend customization. The complexity of sex robots may limit the functionality available while the
possible programmability of robots offers new, exciting ways to further customize robots. Recent
work [31,74] on roboticists suggests that they sometime too narrowly define what constitutes
legitimateuseoftheirrobots;sexroboticistsmaysimilarlytoonarrowlydefinethelegitimateacts
of intimacy withtheirrobots.
Sex robots are envisioned as having artificial intelligence. This artificial intelligence will be
tied to both the voice and movement of the robot. While advances in machine learning have
increased the accuracy of voice recognition and performance of path finding, we are far from
realizing robots that can be involved in convincing, natural conversation and fluid movement
with the world. Thus, robots with a limited range of vocal inflections, phrases, and movements
may provide little room for customization—a vapid fiction. Certainly, we can imagine that users
willfindwaystogobeyondthelimitationsofsexrobots,difficultthoughitmaybe.Therefore,the
design challenge is whether sex robots properly offer a space from within which users can enact
theirembodiedintimatefictions.RealDollowners,forexample,seemedtoenjoythechallengeof
“authoring”theirdolls,yetthiswasonlyenabledbecauseofthewiderangeofdirectionsonecould
take with the Real Doll. Additionally this challenge is not something to be shameful of—owners
relish the chance to share, support, and critique each other’s fantasies. Supporting creative
self-expressionandself-actualizationinhighlypersonalwayswithoutdisparagement—waysthat
allowpeopletointensifytheirrelationswiththemselvesthroughanthropomorphicroleplaywith
another—arguablyhasanimportantplacein anysexual wellness agendamoving forward.
6.2 The Care of the Self
The men we have described own an ostensibly inanimate doll that they seek to bring to life, to
imbuewithfreedomandtheabilitytoengage withtheworldaroundher[ 67];ownerswantadoll
theycanlivewithandunderstandtherealworld,together.ThesefindingspointtowhatFoucault
and Sennett[ 38]calltechnologiesof theself:
In all societies there is another type of technique: techniques which permit in-
dividuals to affect, by their own means, a certain number of operations on their
ownbodies,theirownsouls,theirownthoughts,theirownconduct,andthisina
manner so as to transform themselves, modify themselves, and to attain a certain
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:29
state of perfection, happiness, purity, supernatural power. Let us call those kinds
of techniquestechnologiesof theself.
Thus,whileworkingwithintheinstitutionsthathaveshapedsocietalnormsofsexualityandinti-
macy,RealDollownershavethefreedomtoworkwithintheseconstraints,sometimesreinforcing
extant norms of sexual intimacy and sometimes pushing against them—these actions constitute
“thecareoftheself.”
Certainly, passivity is part of the intimate fantasies owners create. However, this is not a pas-
sivity that is totally disconnected from freedom. Forum users enact a specific kind of passiveness
by protectingdolls fromthe repercussionsthat resultfrom the dolls construction(e.g.,joints that
bend during storage), intended use (e.g., tears in skin from intercourse), and creative additions
(e.g., makeup that damages the skin). Yet the helplessness of the doll appears to contribute to the
feelings the owner has for it, and even was described by one owner as his motivation for buying
thedoll. Thiscan beseenasa humandesireto nurtureanotherand hencecareof theself.
Commercial technologically-enabled toys designed for long term relationships often require
care from humans (e.g., Tamagotchi, Furby toys), which is highly effective for promoting rela-
tionships as it taps into human needs to provide nurturance [ 21]. Studies have shown that many
children[ 37]andolderadults[ 56]enjoythefactthatpreternaturalrobots[ 86]needmaintenance.
Thenurturingthattheseownersdoinvolvesomeactivitiesthatmightbeseenasgoingagainstthe
traditionalrolesprescribedtomen,suchasbathingandstylingthehair.Thereisthepotentialfor
mentoexperimentinnon-traditionalgenderrolesinthekindsofcaretheygivetodolls,inaspace
(TDF) where it is sanctioned. Indeed, taking care of dolls requires men to understand embodied
experiencestraditionally practicedby women (e.g.,withmakeupandclothing).
Thus,themeaningful,intimaterelationshipsdollownershaveestablishedfallinlinewithhow
technologies,farfrombeingtools,arebecomingourpartnersandsubjectsofourattachment(e.g.,
becomingattachedtoservicerobotsinthemilitary[ 29]andhospital[ 62]).Moreimportantly,how-
ever,thisattachmenttorobotsspeakstohowwedesirerobotswhoneedusforcare.Designought
to consider the needs of users beyond physical sex (or any other robot “functionality,” narrowly
construed) and that the embodied nature of robots coupled with sexual functionality cannot be
entirelydisentangled fromemotionalandpsychologicalaspectsof intimacy.
6.3 Alternative Viewpoints
In the popular discourse—just as with pornography—people have been concerned with how sex
robots reinforce heteronormative, unrealistic expectations of women and relationships. Indeed
we do not wish to dismiss or devalue these important discussions. However, because this has
been discussed in such depth by others (cf. Section 1), we have chosen instead to highlight the
complex voices and practices of Real Doll owners. Instead of simplistically depicting owners as
a different kind of doll—a sex-hungry, objectifying caricature, we offer a perspective that owners
areseekinganintimaterelationship withdollsthatareperhapsnotsodifferentthanso-calledreal
relationships.
Randell-Moon[ 71]providesasomatechnicalperspective(foranHCIperspectiveonsomaesthet-
ics see Höök’s [ 49] work) on how the body is discursively produced not as an apolitical artifact,
but rather a “technology of and for the dissemination of particular forms of cultural and social
knowledge.” Importantly, her analysis suggests technologies give the illusion that we are free to
mold artifacts without outside influence but, in fact, this illusion makes us docile to the social
structuresthatdisciplineustouseourartifactsincertainlegitimateways.Thesesocialstructures
come bothfrom thepeopleandinstitutionsthatsurroundusand thedesignsof theartifacts.
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:30 N.M.Suet al.
Gillcriticallydescribesashiftintherepresentationofwomeninadvertisementsfromapassive,
sexually desired object to savvy female empowered with sexual agency. This brand of feminism
conveys an agenda that is outwardly progressive and authentic but, Gill argues, an ultimately
limited and predictable enactment of traditional male sexual fantasies. For instance, the “midriff
character” is a canonical figure in advertisements who deliberately plays with her sexual power
and is always “up for it” (that is, sex) [ 40]. Such figures are powerfully, yet subtly oppressive to
women because they present women as responsible for choosing to be gazed upon as an object
of desire. Both Randell-Moon and Gill make an argument that technologies of media can seem to
offer freedom to women while normalizing existing gendered perspectives and practices. These
potentiallyharmfulrepresentationsarerenderedevenmoreinsidiousbecausetheyarecloakedin
a veneerof progressiveness.
Just by looking at the available Real Dolls one can purchase (cf. Section 3.3), it is obvious that
theydopropagate tropes that can be considered harmful representations of women—unrealistic
expectations for women’s bodies and idealized, regressive roles for women in relationships. For
instance, the behaviors of doll owners arguably fit into larger societal framing of women as in
need of protection from men. Moreover, by highlighting how doll owners go beyond physical
sex, but towards intimacy, it is reasonable to say that our findings may be framed in terms of
how owners, through their creative activities and construction of meaningful relationships, are
insidiouslyoppressingwomen,evenifnotexplicitly.Thiscanbeconsideredaformof“benevolent
sexism,” where women are seen as “pure creatures who ought to be protected, supported, and
adored and whose love is necessary to make a man complete” [ 41]; this constrains the roles of
women to domains thatare consideredsafe bymen and furtherreinforcegender inequality[ 41].
Moreover,eventheowners’“performances”offemininityarethemselvesproblematic.Whilewe
maymarvelattheownersfortheirdeftperformance—applyingmakeuponanddressingthedoll—
ofagenderthattheydonotthemselvesidentifyas,theseperformancesarenonethelesslimitedand
ap r i o r ishaped by gender stereotypes. This is not surprising—for Butler, gender is nearly always
performedasastylizedrepetitionofactsthatareconsistentwithdominantheterosexualideals[ 28,
p.140–141].
Inthisresearch,wehavestriventounderstandthephenomenonofRealDollsonitsownterms
toanticipatethedirectionthatdesignersandusersappeartobetakingintimate,embodiedartifacts
suchassexrobots,ratherthantoproduceamoralstatementabouttheuseofthesedolls.Wehave
foundRDsafruitfulexampleofhowpeopleexperimentandexperiencesexualitywithnewforms
of intimate objects. However, while we do not adopt a particular moral stance towards Real Doll
users,wedonotclaimtosupportaneutralstanceonsexdollsandsexrobotsastheycurrentlyexist.
Indeed, as discussedabove, we find that users of RealDolls are enacting many of the problematic
conceptualizations of gender and sex found in society, from popular films to pornography, such
as via benevolent sexism, unrealistic and limiting views of women. By bracketing out popular
discourse around RD users, we were able to make progress on our research goals. This move,
while partially a pragmatic one, also implicitly legitimizes RDs as a way to experiment with and
experiencesexuality.Webelievethatourfindingsmaymoveforwardfutureworkontheon-going
ethicaldialogue on sexrobots.
7 CONCLUSION
Foucault and Sennett [ 38] note that by continually examining ourselves as sexual beings, “we
experience our sex in the head.” Our analysis of Real Doll users on an online forum support
this assertion. Narrowly construed, Real Dolls appear to be designed for sexual intercourse.
However,theresultsofourstudysuggestthatRealDollownersusethemformuchmore.Owners
creatively find means to create fantasies around dolls—embodied intimate fictions. These fictions
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:31
gives owners the freedom to choose and stylize meaningful relationships. They bring to light
that sexual intimacy, even with “inanimate” dolls, is more than just physical, mindless sex, but
somethingwheretheowneris psychologicallyinvestedin.
If the future is a world with robots, including sex robots, our results suggest that designers
will need to support not only sex with robots, but embodied intimate fictions with robots. Our
results also suggest that designers will need to think about how their sex robots imply a system
of governance—one that prescribes particular sexual norms and relationships. Users do not want
tohaveasexrobotthatisapristine,cleanslate.Atthesametime,asexrobotthatissonarrowly
prescriptivewillstiflethespaceofpossibleembodiedintimatefictions,renderinganunsatisfactory
experience. The sexual wellness approach seems to offer a wider and richer design framing, but
weneedtounderstandthepracticesandexperiencesthatwillcontributetowardssexualwellness.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
WearegratefultoCarmanNeustaedterandouranonymousreviewersfortheirconstructivefeed-
back.David Crandallprovidedvaluable adviceon image obfuscationstrategies.
REFERENCES
[1] Martha Alexander and AFP. 2017. The Japanese Men Who Choose Sex Dolls for Rubber Romance. Retrieved July 2,
2017from http://www.dailymail.co.uk/ ∼/article-4653208/index.html .
[2] PeterAlilunas.2018.Faraway,soclose:Technology,spectatorship,andthepastsandfuturesofpornographystudies.
Porn Studies (2018),1–13. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/23268743.2018.1435405
[3] TamaraAlsheikh,JenniferA.Rode,andSiânE.Lindley.2011.(Whose)value-sensitivedesign:Astudyoflong-distance
relationships in an arabic cultural context. In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported Coop-
erative Work (CSCW’11) .ACM, NewYork, NY, 75–84. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1958824.1958836
[4] Yusuff Jelili Amuda and Ismaila B. Tijani. 2012. Ethical and Legal Implications of Sex Robot: An Islamic Perspective.
SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2008011. Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY. Retrieved August 22, 2017 from
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2008011 .
[5] Kristina Andersen. 2013. Making magic machines. In Proceedings of the 10th European Academy of Design
Conference-Crafting the Future . Retrieved October 17, 2016 from http://www.academia.edu/download/39154759/
019_magicmachine.pdf .
[6] SarahAubrey,JohnCameron,SidneyKimmel(Producers),andCraigGillespie(Director).2007. LarsandtheRealGirl
[MotionPicture] . Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM),BeverlyHills, CA. http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0805564/ .
[7] JeffreyBardzellandShaowenBardzell.2011.Pleasureisyourbirthright:Digitallyenableddesignersextoysasacase
of third-wave HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’11) .A C M ,
NewYork, NY, 257–266. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1978979
[8] Jeffrey Bardzell, Shaowen Bardzell, Guo Zhang, and Tyler Pace. 2014. The lonely raccoon at the ball: Designing for
intimacy, sociability, and selfhood. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI’14).ACM, New York, NY, 3943–3952. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557127
[9] ShaowenBardzell.2008.Enchantedartifacts:Socialproductivityandidentityinvirtualmaterialecologies. Artifact2,
2(2008),123–136. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/17493460903020141
[10] ShaowenBardzell.2010.FeministHCI:Takingstockandoutlininganagendafordesign.In ProceedingsoftheSIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’10) . ACM, New York, NY, 1301–1310. DOI:https://doi.org/
10.1145/1753326.1753521
[11] ShaowenBardzellandJeffreyBardzell.2007.Docileavatars:Aesthetics,experience,andsexualinteractioninsecond
life. InProceedings of the 21st British HCI Group Annual Conference on People and Computers: HCI...But Not As We
Know It - Volume 1 (BCS-HCI’07) . British Computer Society, Swinton, UK, 3–12. DOI:http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?
id=1531294.1531296
[12] Shaowen Bardzell and Jeffrey Bardzell. 2016. Technosexuality. In The Wiley Blackwell Encyclopedia of Gender and
Sexuality Studies .American CancerSociety, 1–3. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118663219.wbegss469
[13] Shaowen Bardzell and Jeffrey Bardzell. 2011. Towards a feminist HCI methodology: Social science, feminism, and
HCI.InProceedingsoftheSIGCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems(CHI’11) .A CM,NewY ork,NY,
675–684. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979041
[14] ShaowenBardzellandWilliamOdom.2008.Theexperienceofembodiedspaceinvirtualworlds:Anethnographyof
asecond lifecommunity. Space andCulture 11,3 (2008),239–259. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/1206331208319148
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:32 N.M.Suet al.
[15] Laura Bates. 2017. Opinion | The trouble with sex robots. The New York Times. Opinion (2017). Retrieved August 12,
2017from https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/opinion/sex-robots-consent.html .
[16] Julie Beck. 2013. Married to a doll: Why one man advocates synthetic love. The Atlantic (2013). Retrieved Jan-
uary 6, 2016 from http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2013/09/married-to-a-doll-why-one-man-advocates-
synthetic-love/279361/ .
[17] GenevieveBell,MarkBlythe,andPhoebeSengers.2005.Makingbymakingstrange:Defamiliarizationandthedesign
of domestic technologies. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 12, 2 (2005), 149–173. DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1145/1067860.1067862
[18] Genevieve Bell and Paul Dourish. 2007. Back to the shed: Gendered visions of technology and domesticity. Personal
andUbiquitous Computing 11,5(2007),373–381. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-006-0073-8
[19] Raymond Bellour. 1975. Le blocage symbolique. Communications 23, 1 (1975), 235–350. DOI:https://doi.org/10.3406/
comm.1975.1360
[20] PeterL.BergerandThomasLuckmann.1967. TheSocialConstructionofReality:ATreatiseintheSociologyofKnowl-
edge(1st ed.). Anchor, New York.
[21] Timothy W. Bickmore and Rosalind W. Picard. 2005. Establishing and maintaining long-term human-computer re-
lationships. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 12, 2 (2005), 293–327. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/
1067860.1067867
[22] JeremyBirnholtz,IrinaShklovski,MarkHandel,andEranToch.2015.Let’stalkaboutsex(Apps),CSCW.In Proceed-
ingsofthe18thACMConferenceCompaniononComputerSupportedCooperativeWork&SocialComputing(CSCW’15
Companion) .ACM, NewYork, NY, 283–288. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2685553.2685557
[23] Mark Blythe, Kristina Andersen, Rachel Clarke, and Peter Wright. 2016. Anti-solutionist strategies: Seriously silly
designfiction.In Proceedingsofthe2016CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems(CHI’16) .ACM,New
York, NY,4968–4978. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858482
[24] Mark Blythe and Mark Jones. 2004. Human computer (sexual) interactions. Interactions 11, 5 (2004), 75–76. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1145/1015530.1015570
[25] JohannaBrewer,Joseph‘Jofish’Kaye,AmandaWilliams,andSusanWyche.2006.Sexualinteractions:Whyweshould
talk about sex in HCI. In Proceedings of the CHI’06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
EA’06). ACM,New York, NY, 1695–1698. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1125451.1125765
[26] E. Broadbent, R. Stafford, and B. MacDonald. 2009. Acceptance of healthcare robots for the older population: Re-
view and future directions. International Journal of Social Robotics 1, 4 (2009), 319. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12369-009-0030-6
[27] Amy Bruckman. 2002. Studying the amateur artist: A perspective on disguising data collected in human subjects
research on the internet. Ethics and Information Technology 4, 3 (2002), 217–231. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1023/A:
1021316409277
[28] Judith Butler.2006. GenderTrouble: Feminism andtheSubversion of Identity .Routledge,New York, 236.
[29] Julie Carpenter. 2013. Just Doesn’t Look Right: Exploring the Impact of Humanoid Robot Integration into Explosive
OrdnanceDisposalTeams .IGIGlobalPlatform,Hershey,PA,609–636. DOI:https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-4666-2211-1.
ch032
[30] Kathy Charmaz. 2006. Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide Through Qualitative Analysis . Pine Forge
Press, Thousand Oaks, CA, 223.
[31] EunJeongCheonandNormanMakotoSu.2017.Configuringtheuser:“Robotshaveneedstoo”.In Proceedingsofthe
2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW’17) .A C M ,N e wY o r k ,
NY, 191–206. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998329
[32] DeborahA.ChristelandSusanC.Dunn.2017.AverageAmericanwomen’sclothingsize:Comparingnationalhealth
and nutritional examination surveys (1988–2010) to ASTM international misses & women’s plus size clothing. In-
ternational Journal of Fashion Design, Technology and Education 10, 2 (2017), 129–136. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/
17543266.2016.1214291
[33] Martin D. Cooney, Shuichi Nishio, and Hiroshi Ishiguro. 2012. Recognizing affection for a touch-based interaction
withahumanoidrobot.In Proceedingsofthe2012IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems .
1420–1427. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2012.6385956
[34] KerstinDautenhahn.2007.Sociallyintelligentrobots:DimensionsofHuman–robotinteraction. PhilosophicalTrans-
actions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 362, 1480 (2007), 679–704. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2006.
2004pmid:17301026
[35] John Dewey.2005. Art as Experience (Perigeetradepbk.ed ed.).OCLC:600952451.Perigee,New York, NY,371.
[36] Anna Eaglin and Shaowen Bardzell. 2011. Sex toys and designing for sexual wellness. In Proceedings of the CHI’11
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA’11) . ACM, New York, NY, 1837–1842. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1145/1979742.1979879
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:33
[37] Ylva Fernaeus, Maria Håkansson, Mattias Jacobsson, and Sara Ljungblad. 2010. How do you play with a robotic
toy animal?: A long-term study of pleo. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Interaction Design and
Children(IDC’10) .ACM, NewYork, NY, 39–48. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1810543.1810549
[38] MichelFoucault andRichard Sennett.1981.Sexualityandsolitude. Humanities in Review 1(1981),3–21.
[39] Cheryl D. Fryar, Qiuping Gu, and Katherine M. Flegal. 2016. Anthropometric reference data for children and adults:
Unitedstates,2011–2014. Vital Health Stat. NationalCenterfor HealthStatistics 3,39(2016),1–46.
[40] Rosalind Gill. 2008. Empowerment/sexism: Figuring female sexual agency in contemporary advertising. Feminism
andPsychology 18,1 (2008),35–60. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/0959353507084950
[41] PeterGlickandSusanT.Fiske.1996.Theambivalentsexisminventory:Differentiatinghostileandbenevolentsexism.
Journal ofPersonalityand Social Psychology 70,3 (1996),491–512. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.70.3.491
[42] Elizabeth Goodman and Janet Vertesi. 2012. Design for X?: Distribution choices and ethical design. In Proceedings
of the CHI’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA’12) . ACM, New York, NY, 81–90.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2212776.2212786
[43] Ángel J. Gordo-López and Richard Cleminson. 2004. Techno-Sexual Landscapes: Changing Relations between Technol-
ogy andSexuality . OCLC:ocm55086964.FreeAssociation Books, London, 144.
[44] GeorgeGurley.2015.RealDollSexToys:TheMakingofSexbots(NSFW)|VanityFair.RetrievedJanuary6,2016from
http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2015/04/sexbots-realdoll-sex-toys .
[45] Oliver L. Haimson, Jed R. Brubaker, and Gillian R. Hayes. 2014. DDFSeeks same: Sexual health-related language in
online personal ads for men who have sex with men. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI’14) . ACM,New York, NY,1615–1624. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557077
[46] Lynne Hall. 2016. Sex with robots for love free encounters. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Love
and Sex with Robots . Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, Cham, 128–136. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-57738-8_12
[47] Bram Hendriks, Bernt Meerbeek, Stella Boess, Steffen Pauws, and Marieke Sonneveld. 2011. Robot vacuum cleaner
personality and behavior. International Journal of Social Robotics 3, 2 (2011), 187–195. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12369-010-0084-5
[48] Zachary Henkel, Robin R. Murphy, and Cindy L. Bethel. 2012. Towards a computational method of scaling a ro-
bot’s behavior via proxemics. In Proceedings of the 7th Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human–Robot
Interaction (HRI’12) . ACM, NewYork, NY, 145–146. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2157689.2157727
[49] Kristina Höök, Martin P. Jonsson, Anna Ståhl, and Johanna Mercurio. 2016. Somaesthetic appreciation design. In
Proceedingsofthe2016CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems(CHI’16) .ACM,NewYork,NY,3131–
3142. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858583
[50] MarianneW.JørgensenandLouiseJ.Phillips.2002. DiscourseAnalysisasTheoryandMethod .SAGE,ThousandOaks,
CA,244.
[51] Robert Jungk and Norbert R Müllert. 1996. Future Workshops: How to Create Desirable Futures . OCLC: 611538477.
Institutefor Social Inventions,London.
[52] Gopinaath Kannabiran, Jeffrey Bardzell, and Shaowen Bardzell. 2011. How HCI talks about sexuality: Discursive
strategies, blind spots, and opportunities for future research. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’11) . ACM,New York, NY,695–704. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979043
[53] GopinaathKannabiran,ShaowenBardzell,andJeffreyBardzell.2012.Designing(for)desire:Acriticalstudyoftech-
nosexualityinHCI.In Proceedingsofthe7thNordicConferenceonHuman-ComputerInteraction:MakingSenseThrough
Design (NordiCHI’12) . ACM,New York, NY,655–664. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2399016.2399116
[54] Joseph ‘Jofish’ Kaye and Liz Goulding. 2004. Intimate objects. In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Designing In-
teractive Systems: Processes, Practices, Methods, and Techniques (DIS’04) . ACM, New York, NY, 341–344. DOI:https://
doi.org/10.1145/1013115.1013175
[55] Angeliki Kerasidou and Ruth Horn. 2016.Making space for empathy:Supporting doctors in the emotional labour of
clinicalcare. BMC Medical Ethics 17(2016),8. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1186/s12910-016-0091-7 .pmid:26818248
[56] Amanda Lazar, Hilaire J. Thompson, Anne Marie Piper, and George Demiris. 2016. Rethinking the design of robotic
petsforolderadults.In Proceedingsofthe2016ACMConferenceonDesigningInteractiveSystems(DIS’16) .A CM,New
York, NY, 1034–1046. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2901790.2901811
[57] Min Kyung Lee, Sara Kiesler, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. Receptionist or information Kiosk: How do people talk with a
robot? In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW’10) .A C M ,N e w
York, NY, 31–40. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1718918.1718927
[58] DavidN.LLevy.2007. Love+SexwithRobots:TheEvolutionofHuman–RobotRelationships .OCLC:191866790.Harper-
Collinse-books, Pymble,NSW; New York, NY.
[59] HaroldI.LiefandRenéeC.Fox.1963.Trainingfor“detachedconcern”inmedicalstudents.In ThePsychologicalBasis
ofMedical Practice . Harper &Row,NewYork, NY, 12–35.
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.13:34 N.M.Suet al.
[60] PatrickLin,KeithAbney,andGeorgeBekey.2011.Robotethics:Mappingtheissuesforamechanizedworld. Artificial
Intelligence 175,5(2011),942–949. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2010.11.026
[61] JosephLindley,DhruvSharma,andRobertPotts.2014.Anticipatoryethnography:Designfictionasaninputtodesign
ethnography. EthnographicPraxisinIndustryConferenceProceedings 2014,1(2014),237–253. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
1111/1559-8918.01030
[62] Sara Ljungblad, Jirina Kotrbova, Mattias Jacobsson, Henriette Cramer, and Karol Niechwiadowicz. 2012. Hospital
robot at work: Something alien or an intelligent colleague? In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer
SupportedCooperativeWork(CSCW’12) .ACM,NewYork,NY,177–186. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145233
[63] Eric Mack. 2017. Not all sex robots will look human, sexpert Dan Savage says. Retrieved August 22, 2017 from
https://www.cnet.com/news/dan-savage-sexbots-future-sex/ .
[64] JenniferMankoff,JenniferA.Rode,andHaakonFaste.2013.Lookingpastyesterday’stomorrow:Usingfuturesstudies
methods to extend the research horizon. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI’13) . ACM, NewYork, NY, 1629–1638. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466216
[65] Maria Marcus. 1981. A Taste for Pain: On Masochism and Female Sexuality . Trans. by Joan Tate. St. Martin’s Press,
New York, NY, 276.
[66] John McCarthy andPeter Wright.2004. Technologyas Experience . MITPress, Cambridge,Mass, 211.
[67] Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Taylor Carman. 2013. Phenomenology of Perception . Trans. by Donald Landes. (1st ed.).
Routledge,Abingdon, Oxon;NewYork, 696.
[68] ChristineMilrodandMartinA.Monto.2012.Thehobbyistandthegirlfriendexperience:Behaviorsandpreferences
of malecustomers of internet sexualservice providers. Deviant Behavior 33,10 (2012),792–810. DOI:https://doi.org/
10.1080/01639625.2012.707502
[69] ZabetPatterson.1999.Goingon-line:Consumingpornographyinthedigitalera.In HardCore:Power,Pleasure,andthe
“FrenzyoftheVisible” (Expandedpbk.eded.).LindaWilliams(Ed.),UniversityofCaliforniaPress,Berkeley,104–123.
[70] Trevor J. Pinch and Wiebe E. Bijker. 1987. The social construction of facts and artifacts: Or how the sociology of
scienceandthesociologyoftechnologymightbenefiteachother.In TheSocialConstructionofTechnologicalSystems:
NewDirections in theSociology and History ofTechnology .MITPress, Cambridge,MA, 17–50.
[71] Holly Randell-Moon. 2012. I’m Nobody Feminist Media Studies 12, 2 (2012), 265–280. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/
14680777.2011.597105
[72] Realbotix. 2017. For the last 20 years, Realdoll has been creating the world’s most realistic silicone dolls. Retrieved
August 22,2017from https://realbotix.systems/ .
[73] K. Richardson. 2016. Sex robot matters: Slavery, the prostituted, and the rights of machines. IEEE Technology and
Society Magazine 35,2 (2016),46–53. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/MTS.2016.2554421
[74] Kathleen Richardson. 2016. The asymmetrical ‘relationship’: Parallels between prostitution and the development of
sexrobots. SIGCASComputers and Society 45,3(2016),290–293. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2874239.2874281
[75] Jennifer Robertson. 2010. Gendering humanoid robots: Robo-sexism in Japan. Body & Society 16, 2 (2010), 1–36.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/1357034X10364767
[76] Jennifer A. Rode. 2011. A theoretical agenda for feminist HCI. Interacting with Computers 23, 5 (2011), 393–400.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intcom.2011.04.005
[77] Gillian Rose. 2001. Visual Methodologies: An Introduction to the Interpretation of Visual Materials . SAGE Publications,
Thousand Oaks, CA,246.
[78] AnnaC.B.Russell.2009.Blurringthelovelines:Thelegalimplicationsofintimacywithmachines. ComputerLaw&
Security Review 25,5(2009),455–463. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2009.07.003
[79] Matthias Scheutz and Thomas Arnold. 2016. Are we ready for sex robots? In Proceedings of the 11th ACM/IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Human–Robot Interaction (HRI’16) . IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, 351–358. http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?id=2906831.2906891
[80] Rock Schroeter (Director). 2002.Guys andDolls [Motion Picture]. http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0445980/ .
[81] Joel Shannon. 2018. Proposed ‘sex robot brothel’ blocked by Houston government: ‘We are not Sin City’. USA
TODAY(2018). Retrieved October 15, 2018 from https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation-now/2018/10/03/
sex-robot-brothel-blocked-houston-texas/1518298002/ .
[82] Noel Sharkey, Aimee va Wynsberghe, Scott Robbins, and Eleanor Hancock. 2017. Our Sexual Future With Robots.
Foundation for Responsible Robots, The Hague, Netherlands.Retrieved July 5, 2017 from http://responsiblerobotics.
org/2017/07/05/frr-report-our-sexual-future-with-robots/ .
[83] TobinAnthony Siebers.2016. Disability Theory . University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI,238.
[84] Devendra Singh. 1993. Adaptive significance of female physical attractiveness: Role of waist-to-hip ratio. Journal of
Personalityand Social Psychology 65,2 (1993),293–307. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.65.2.293
[85] MarquardSmith.2013. TheEroticDoll:AModernFetish .YaleUniversityPress,NewHaven,376.RetrievedMay8,2016
fromhttp://westminsterresearch.wmin.ac.uk/12409/ .
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May2019.Of Dolls andMen: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy withRobots 13:35
[86] Norman Makoto Su, Leslie S. Liu, and Amanda Lazar. 2014. Mundanely miraculous: The robot in healthcare. In
Proceedingsofthe8thNordicConferenceonHuman-ComputerInteraction:Fun,Fast,Foundational(NordiCHI’14) .ACM,
NewYork, NY, 391–400. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2639189.2641216
[87] Jessica M. Szczuka and Nicole C. Krämer. 2017. Not only the lonely–How men explicitly and implicitly evaluate the
attractiveness of sex robots in comparison to the attractiveness of women, and personal characteristics influencing
this evaluation. Multimodal Technologies andInteraction 1,1(2017),3. DOI:https://doi.org/10.3390/mti1010003
[88] Leila Takayama and Caroline Pantofaru. 2009. Influences on proxemic behaviors in human–robot interaction. In
Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS’09) . IEEE Press,
Piscataway,NJ,5495–5502.RetrievedAugust 7,2017from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1732643.1732940 .
[89] Sarah Valverde. 2012. The Modern Sex Doll-Owner: A Descriptive Analysis. Master’s theses and project reports . Re-
trievedAugust 1,20012from http://digitalcommons.calpoly.edu/theses/849 .
[90] Chad Van De Wiele and Stephanie Tom Tong. 2014. Breaking boundaries: The uses & gratifications of Grindr. In
Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp’14) .
ACM,New York, NY,619–630. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2632048.2636070
[91] MarynelVázquez,AaronSteinfeld,ScottE.Hudson,andJodiForlizzi.2014.Spatialandothersocialengagementcues
in a child-robot interaction: Effects of a sidekick. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human–Robot Interaction (HRI’14) . ACM, New York, NY, 391–398. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2559636.2559684
[92] Linda Williams. 1999. Hard Core: Power, Pleasure, and the “Frenzy of the Visible” (Expanded pbk. ed.). University of
CaliforniaPress, Berkeley,380.
[93] Matthew Wood, Gavin Wood, and Madeline Balaam. 2017. “They’Re Just Tixel Pits, Man”: Disputing the ‘reality’ of
virtualrealitypornographythroughthestorycompletionmethod.In Proceedingsofthe2017CHIConferenceonHuman
FactorsinComputingSystems(CHI’17) .ACM,NewYork,NY,5439–5451. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025762
[94] Matthew Wood, Gavin Wood, and Madeline Balaam. 2015. Talk about sex: Designing games to facilitate healthy
discussions around sex. In Proceedings of the 2015 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play (CHI
PLAY’15).ACM, NewYork, NY, 795–798. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2793107.2810270
[95] PeterWrightandJohn McCarthy.2008.EmpathyandexperienceinHCI. In Proceedings oftheSIGCHIConferenceon
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’08) . ACM, New York, NY, 637–646. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.
1357156
[96] SusanWyche,PhoebeSengers,andRebeccaE.Grinter.2006.Historicalanalysis:Usingthepasttodesignthefuture.
InProceedingsofUbicomp’06 .Springer-Verlag,Berlin,35–51.RetrievedDecember13,2007from http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/11853565_3 .
[97] Ian Yeoman and Michelle Mars. 2012. Robots, men and sex tourism. Futures44, 4 (2012), 365–371. DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.futures.2011.11.004
[98] Iris Marion Young. 1980. Throwing like a girl: A phenomenology of feminine body comportment motility and spa-
tiality.Human Studies 3,1(1980),137–156. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02331805
Received May 2018; revised November 2018; accepted November 2018
ACM Transactions on Computer-HumanInteraction, Vol. 26,No. 3,Article 13.Publicationdate:May 2019.