Merging algorithms for enterprise search
PengFei (Vincent) Li
Australian National University
u4959060@anu.edu.auPaul Thomas
CSIRO and
Australian National University
paul.thomas@csiro.auDavid Hawking
Funnelback Pty Ltd and
Australian National University
david.hawking@acm.org
ABSTRACT
Eective enterprise search must draw on a number of sources|
for example web pages, telephone directories, and databases.
Doing this means we need a way to make a single sorted list
from results of very dierent types.
Many merging algorithms have been proposed but none
have been applied to this, realistic, application. We report
the results of an experiment which simulates heterogeneous
enterprise retrieval, in a university setting, and uses multi-
grade expert judgements to compare merging algorithms.
Merging algorithms considered include several variants of
round-robin, several methods proposed by Rasolofo et al. in
the Current News Metasearcher, and four novel variations
including a learned multi-weight method.
We nd that the round-robin methods and one of the
Rasolofo methods perform signicantly worse than others.
The GDS TS method of Rasolofo achieves the highest average
NDCG@101score but the dierences between it and the other
GDS methods, local reranking, and the multi-weight method
were not signicant.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.4 [ Information Storage and Retrieval ]: Systems and
software|performance evaluation (eciency and eective-
ness), distributed systems .
Keywords
Federated search; information retrieval; results merging
1. INTRODUCTION
Enterprise search provides information access across an
enterprise|for example a company, government body, or
academic institution. Although relatively little-studied, this
is a signicant problem: a large majority of enterprises have
1Normalised Discounted Cumulative Gain to rank 10. See
[4].Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for proï¬t or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the ï¬rst page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior speciï¬c permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ADCS â€™13, December 05 - 06 2013, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights
licensed to ACM. ACM 978-1-4503-2524-0/13/12 ...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2537734.2537750.ineective search of their own online information [9, 17] and
it contributes to signicant wasted time|one to two hours
per day for white-collar workers|as well as nancial loss
[17].
Most search tools, including large-scale web search engines,
crawl a document collection and create a single index, which is
then used to respond to queries. However, a typical enterprise
will have information spread across a large number of sources:
contact information might be in an address book, exposed via
LDAP or over the web; public web pages will describe some
activities or products; internal web pages may discuss policies
and procedures; information on customer engagements may
live in its own specialised repository; calendars and network
drives may be available to share; the enterprise may make
use of external resources such as subscription databases or
hosted software; and so forth.
In many cases these sources will not be accessible to a
crawler as there will be no way to enumerate all records
(e.g. databases with search, but no browse, interfaces); or
access will be restricted by agreement (e.g. commercial soft-
ware with licence restrictions or undocumented data formats);
or for practical reasons (e.g. pay-per-access databases run
by third parties). This rules out the conventional gather-
and-index model and requires that we use techniques from
federated search (\metasearch", \distributed search").
Rather than use a single index, federated search aggregates
several independent sources behind a single search interface.
Each source has an associated search engine, which is typ-
ically considered a black box: at query time, each search
engine is interrogated independently and the result sets com-
bined before being returned to the user.
This alleviates problems of distribution, heterogeneous
data, and access restrictions. However, a federated system
must (at a minimum) consider server discovery, how to nd
the servers to include; server characterisation, how to repre-
sent the holdings and extent of each server; server selection,
how to identify the appropriate servers for each query; trans-
lation to and from each server's API or other interface; and
result merging, how to combine the results from independent
servers into one ranked list. For an overview of federated
algorithms see e.g. Shokouhi and Si [14]. In this paper we
concentrate on the problem of merging.
1.1 Result merging
Result merging is possibly the most important outstand-
ing problem in federated search. The problem can be sum-
marised thus: given a set of results from each of a set of
42Merged results
ResultsQueryQueryFigure 1: An enterprise search engine must merge results
from dierent sources to produce a single ranked list. The
results may be heterogeneous, and cooperation from the
sources may be minimal or non-existent.
servers, produce a single ranked list (Figure 1).2Note that
this formulation allows many variants. We need not respect
the original ordering from each server (we can rank a server's
second result ahead of its rst, in our nal output), but
we may take account of the query, the result presentations
(snippets, URLs, scores, ranks), the referenced documents
(full text), and/or server characteristics (scale, scope, eec-
tiveness). Importantly too we cannot rely on cooperation
from servers: that is, we cannot assume anything more than
a query-result interface. This limited interface means we can-
not make use of language models or size estimates, unless we
use sampling techniques [16], and if servers return document
scores then we cannot assume they are on the same scale.
Many merging algorithms have been described. However,
the evaluations to date may not tell us anything about their
eectiveness in an enterprise setting. Performance of many
algorithms varies considerably between collections, but more
importantly none of the standard testbeds accurately rep-
resents enterprise contexts: typical evaluations have relied
on one or more of the TREC ad-hoc or web test collections.
These testbeds are homogeneous, in that they include only
one document type (semi-structured text or HTML); often
have subcollections or \servers" of uniform size; and do not
treat typical enterprise content or information needs.
\Aggregated" search|as seen in e.g. some web search en-
gines [5]|does deal with diering result types, but merging
is still poorly understood: to the best of our knowledge there
is no shared testbed, servers are typically completely coop-
erative (they are run by the same people), and documents
and information needs on the public web will be dierent to
those in an enterprise.
1.2 A university example
We illustrate these ideas with reference to search at the
Australian National University (ANU). Like many large or-
ganisations, the ANU publishes information over a number
of channels, for a number of audiences, and in a number of
formats including front-ends to structured databases (such
as the telephone directory and library catalogue), calendars,
and semi-structured pages from more than 500 dierent web
servers. Individual units in the university add email lists,
le shares, local web servers, and other local resources; and
the university also makes use of third-party services such as
2This corresponds to Shokouhi and Si's \federated search
merging" or \metasearch merging", not \fusion" [14].Twitter, Facebook, and YouTube to reach a wider audience
or for specialised hosting.
These sources are very dierent in size (from quite small to
more than a million documents), subject matter, language,
intended audience (sta, potential or current students, re-
searchers, funders, the public), interface, search capability
(ranked or Boolean searches of dierent quality and with
varying, or no API), and control (the ANU runs its own web
search, but must rely on third parties to search e.g. YouTube).
This is, however, a realistic case of enterprise search: cer-
tainly people at or interested in the ANU would like to search
these sources, and we argue that other enterprises will look
similar at least in their diversity.
Again, the range of sources and the restrictions on access
make it impossible to build a central index; and yet a \single
search box" would be useful, especially for users not familiar
with each source. So if we were to build a federated search
system to cover all these sources, how should we handle result
merging? This paper describes an experiment to evaluate
algorithms and understand our choices.
2. METHODS
We examined the merging problem with an ad-hoc-style
test collection based on the university example above. Ten
merging methods were considered and evaluated on NDCG
and precision at 10.
2.1 Test collection
Our test collection comprises 44 queries which might be
issued to a university search engine; eleven sources, with
varied characteristics; and a total of 3000 documents judged
on a ve-point scale.
Queries. Queries were created by the authors, with refer-
ence to common queries on the existing ANU search services.
They are intended to cover a range of information needs and
include searches for:
people at, or connected with, the ANU (13 queries such
as \H.C. Coombs" or \Brian Schmidt");
links with other organisations (8 queries including
\NICTA" and \NHMRC");
material for a press release (7 queries across varied
topics);
regional connections (5 queries including \South Korea"
and \China");
potential for research collaboration (7 queries across
varied topics); and
university departments and facilities (4 queries such as
\ANU library" and \fenner school").
Table 1 shows a sample of the queries used. The average
length across the whole set was 2.15 words, ranging from one
to three words, with a single outlier of nine words.
We believe these are a realistic representation of enterprise
search needs at a university. Some are best answered by
a single document, from a single source (e.g. sta names,
\student admin"); others are more complex and require syn-
thesis across several sources (e.g. \big data", \indigenous
languages").
43afghanistan
South Korea
Student Admin
murray darling basin
Alistair Rendell
climate change
Sir Mark Oliphant
South Korea
NICTA
Sir Howard Florey
China
murray darling basin
Table 1: Twelve queries chosen at random from the set of
44.
Internal:
ANU web University web pages
ANU contacts Searchable sta list and contact
details
ANU map Building index and department
locations
ANU library Complete library catalogue
StudyAt Course catalogue
ANU research (3) Three services: lists of re-
searchers, research projects, and
research publications
D-SPACE Digital publications
External:
Twitter (external) ANU Twitter feed
YouTube (external) ANU YouTube channel
Table 2: The sources included in this testbed cover a range
of size, data type, audience, search interface, and publishing
method. Note that we are unable to provide accurate counts
of the number of documents indexed at each source, since
we are accessing sources only via their search interface. We
understand that the ANU web includes approximately one
million documents, that the ANU library catalogue includes
several million items and that the other sources are much
smaller.
Sources. Table 2 lists the eleven sources used in our experi-
ment. The majority are in-house search engines, which cover
a range of document types and search interfaces, but the
university also publishes material on YouTube and Twitter
where it must rely on the search engines provided. The
\ANU web" source combines more than 500 web sites run
by the central administration or by individual departments,
research groups, or sta using a wide variety of publishing
technology.
Each query was issued to each source, without any ad-
vanced features or any modication. We recorded the re-
ported size of the total result set (\ nresults found") as well
as the rst page of results.
Documents. Unsurprisingly given the range of retrieval
methods, APIs, and holdings, the result sets vary widely
in size and quality. The ANU contacts list for example re-
turned no results to a majority of queries, and never morethan 14; whereas the research publications source has a very
liberal search engine and reported 3758 results on average
(and up to 48,330). There was also considerable variation
across queries, with a mean 11,150 results per query but a
range of 142 (\Rolf Zinkernagel") to 59,024 (\ANU Library").
There were no results for 124 of the 484 querysource
combinations.
We formed the nal pools by downloading the top ten
results, from each source, to each query (or downloading
fewer if there were fewer than ten results). This gave us a
pool of 44 queries and 3000 documents from 11 sources.
There is minimal overlap between these collections. The
ANU web indexes a small subset of the three research col-
lections, but otherwise documents are almost completely
partitioned. On our test queries, in 27 of 44 cases there
was no overlap in the pool; on average there was only one
overlapping document.
Relevant documents were distributed unevenly across the
collections, from an average 0.1 relevant documents per query
in the top ten (the ANU map) up to an average of 7.3 (the
library).
Participants and judgements. Relevance judgements were
provided by 20 participants recruited by word of mouth
at the ANU. Since we are simulating enterprise search for
the university, the participants have relevant background
knowledge and are at least \silver standard" judges by the
standard of Bailey et al. [1].
Participants were shown titles of all results for a query
and asked to mark each result on a ve-point scale, with
instructions as follows:
\Irrelevant is the score given to documents that are
totally irrelevant to the topic.
On-topic but useless is the score given to documents
that are related to the topic but are talking about some
other aspect of the area.
Somewhat useful is the score given to documents that
are relevant to the topic, and the topics that the queries
are intended to retrieve are mentioned in the docu-
ments.
Useful is the score given to documents where most, or
at least some part of the documents are talking about
the intended information.
Comprehensively useful is the score given to the docu-
ments that are talking exactly about the topic."
The full text of each result document was available if
needed, and each query was judged by a single participant.
Figure 2 illustrates the judging interface.
2.2 Measures
We report two measures of each algorithm: NDCG [4] and
precision, both calculated at rank 10. Gains for NDCG were
0 for \irrelevant", then 1, 2, 3, to 4 for \comprehensively
useful". Precision requires binary judgements and we present
these results for dierent thresholds of relevance.
3. ALGORITHMS
We considered ten merging algorithms: six algorithms
from the literature, and four novel variations. Several of
44Figure 2: The interface used to collect relevance judgements.
Participants were asked to judge all documents for a query,
and documents were presented in a random order. Full text
was available if needed, via the \see the page" button.
the best-performing merging algorithms from past work are
unfortunately not appropriate in a non-cooperative, heteroge-
nous setting.
The scoring functions here fall into two families. The rst
assigns a score to each document, allowing us to rank them
directly. The second scores collections instead, and then
ranks documents based on the collection they came from.
3.1 Document scores
Rank. The simplest indication of a document's quality is
the rank assigned by its original search engine: if the engine
is eective, good documents will be at earlier ranks. To use
this to generate a score in the range [0; 1] we score documents
with 1 (rank=1000): that is, the rst (best) document scores
0.999, the next 0.998, then 0.997 etc. (Note that we never
retrieve more than a few tens of documents in practice.)
Generic document scores. The \generic document scor-
ing" functions of Rasolofo et al. [12] make use of document
characteristics as presented by each search engine. They are
attractive since they do not rely on any particular informa-
tion beyond a list of documents, and in particular they do
not rely on scores or full text.
Each document from collection cis represented by some
eld,d. We may use for example its title, or summary, or
whatever else is available. The the score for this document
for queryqis then
GDS cd=jq\djp
jqj2+jdj2
wherejqjis the number of words in the query, and jdjthe
number of words in the eld representing the document.
GDS cdranges from 0 (no overlap) top
2(complete overlap).
Following Rasolofo et al. [12] we use \TS" to mean the
score based on a document's title eld. If there is no title, or
there are no query terms in the title, as a fallback a document
receives 1/10th of its rank score (that is, 0.0999, 0.0998, etc).
This ensures that any document with a query term in its
title is ranked above any document with no query terms in
its title, that is that title scores are always higher than rank
scores; but that documents with no query terms in theirtitle retain their original ordering. \SS" is the same, using
snippets or summaries instead of titles. Details of the GDS
methods are summarised in Section 3.4.
3.2 Collection scores
Document scores do not themselves account for the quality
of a collection, but documents returned by a \good" server
may well deserve a higher rank than those from a \poor"
server. Collection scores allow this. In the experiments
below we use two such scores, prioritising scale and accuracy
respectively.
LMS. The LMS collection score of Rasolofo et al. [11] scores
engines based on the reported size of their result sets: this
prioritises engines with a higher number of responsive docu-
ments. The score for collection cis
LMS c= log 
1 +lcKP
j=1:::nlj!
; (1)
wherelcis the reported length of the result set from c,Kis
a scaling constant set to 600, and there are nservers.
Similarity score. LMS will rank an engine highly if it re-
ports many results, even if the results themselves are poor.
To prioritise engines with more eective search, we also con-
sider scoring engines by their mean DTSS score (a linear
combination of scores from title and summary, falling back
to ranks only if both are zero. See Section 3.4).
3.3 Round-robin algorithms
We are now in a situation to score and rank documents:
that is, to carry out the merge.
Several past systems have used simple round-robin methods
to merge result lists. Round-robin methods simply interleave
the lists from each constituent engine, in order: so the rst-
ranked documents are returned from each engine, then the
second-ranked, and so on.
The question is then how to order the engines themselves,
or equivalently how to order the documents in each tier (note
that round-robin requires that the ordering of engines is the
same for each tier). The simplest approach is to order engines
randomly, which we refer to as \SRR", and we use this as a
baseline.
SRR can only be eective if all engines are equally eective,
and relevant documents are evenly distributed [11, 12]. This
is extremely unlikely in practice, so we considered two novel
alternatives.
\PRR" orders engines according to the reported size of
their result sets, so the rst document in the merged list
is the rst document from the biggest set: this prioritises
engines with a higher number of responsive documents. We
do this by ranking collections according to LMS (Equation 1),
then doing a round-robin merge.
The \SPRR" alternative orders engines according to the
average DTSS score, that is the average similarity between
the query and the documents in each engine's result set: this
prioritises engines with more eective search.
In either case, the round-robin principle enforces diversity
in the head of the nal merged list.
3.4 Generic document ranking algorithms
Using the generic scoring function above gives four further
45(a)
 (b)
 (c)
 (d)
Figure 3: Overall comparison of the methods on precision at 10 documents retrieved (prec@10) for dierent relevance judgment
cutos: (a) \on topic", (b) \somewhat useful", (c) \useful", and (d) \comprehensively useful". Boxes mark 1st/3rd quartiles,
bars mark median.
merging algorithms. These are based entirely on document
characteristics:
\GDS TS" uses TS, that is the score from the title eld
with the rank score as a fallback.
\GDS SS" is similar, but uses the snippet for each
result.
\GDS TSS" uses rst the title, then the snippet, then
the rank. This has been useful in informal experiments
with other heterogeneous environments.
\GDS DTSS" uses a linear combination of scores from
title (with weight 0.9) and summary (0.1), falling back
to ranks only if both are zero.
3.5 Length-based algorithm
The algorithms above make use of only document-based or
only collection-based scores. A novel method which combines
the two is inspired by the LMS and GDS functions, as well
as the CORI selection and merging method [2]. The \LMS"
method combines LMS candDTSS cdscores with CORI-like
normalisation, with a score for document dfrom collection c
of
LMS cd=(DTSS cd+ 0:4LMS cDTSS cd)
1:4
where DTSS cdandLMS care dened as above, the constant
0.4 follows CORI, and the constant 1.4 is for normalisation.
This score aords some weight to the size of each result
set (a proxy for collection quality) as well as the similarity
between document and queries. As with the other GDS-
based methods, it does not make any assumptions about
engine features or result format besides the availability of
titles or snippets and an estimated result size.
3.6 Multiple weights algorithm
The nal GDS-based method in our experiments, also
novel, is the most general algorithm we consider here. It uses
a linear combination of the scores due to DTSS cd(without
rank component), LMS c, rank, and the mean DTSS score of
all documents returned by the server. This multiple weights
method (\MW" below) generalises the GDS family.
In our experiments the weights on each component are
learned with linear regression on the ve-level relevancescore, using four-fold cross-validation. On this training set
the weights were 0.79 for mean DTSS, 0.48 for DTSS, 0.26
for rank and 0.04 for LMS. This is a strong bias towards
similarity measures, and away from simple size of the result
set; but the largest component (mean DTSS) is also a query-
by-query eectiveness measure for each server.
3.7 Local re-indexing
The algorithms above rely only on information presented
in a typical result list|titles, summaries, and sizes. We
also experimented with downloading the full text of each
document, via the URLs provided by each search engine, in-
dexing them locally, and re-ranking the documents using this
index. This overcomes the problems of incompatible scores,
dierent collection statistics, and search engines of diering
eectiveness; however it does represent signicant overhead,
especially as many more documents will be retrieved than
will nally be in the head of the merged list.
We used version 4.4 of the open source Lucene retrieval
system3with default settings for local reindexing and rank-
ing.
One local re-indexing approach was used in the Inquirus
metasearcher by Lawrence and Giles [6] and evaluated along
with a number of local re-indexing alternatives by Craswell
et al. [3]. Craswell et al. found that local reranking methods
were able to outperform those based on scores and ranks, even
when documents were only partially downloaded, though
there was a big range of performance across the local re-
indexing methods. It is an attractive option in our case,
although ranking wildly dierent objects from the same index,
such as our web pages and telephone directory, presents a
serious hurdle.
3.8 Alternatives
Several further merging algorithms have been suggested in
the literature, but are not evaluated here. These rely on fea-
tures which are not generally available, and are certainly not
available from many of the servers in our testbed: document
scores, well-behaved scoring functions, and training data.
A number of proposals use document scores, as reported
by constituent search engines. As these are unlikely to be
on the same scale, they are commonly normalised linearly to
the range (0; 1), tozscores, or by tting separate functions
3lucene.apache.org/
46for relevant and non-relevant documents [7, 8, 10, 13]. Some
of these methods are simple and perform relatively well, but
do require more information from each engine. They are
also na ve to dierences in scoring approaches: for example,
scores from each engine may be distributed dierently; scores
from one engine may be bunched together at one end of the
range since all returned documents are equally good; or one
ineective engine may routinely assign inaccurate scores.
More sophisticated alternatives include the popular CORI
algorithm [2], which combines document scores with a score
for each collection, or the later SSL algorithm [15], which uses
training data to learn how to transform each server's scores
and therefore can account for diering server eectiveness.
Again, neither algorithm is usable in our scenario since we
do not have document scores and nor do we have training
data for SSL.
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.1 Methods compared
We compared the methods on one metric (prec@10) based
on binary relevance levels and another (NDCG@10) taking
advantage of the graded judgements. Figure 3 presents the
prec@10 results for dierent score cutos, averaged across the
44 topics. Figure 4 presents the comparable NDCG scores.
The NDCG@10 plot shows a pattern in which the three
round-robin methods (SRR, PRR, and SPRR) methods are
inferior to the others and that GDS SS is only slightly better.
NDCG@10 conveys more useful information than prec@10
because it makes use of the grades of relevance, rewards
methods which rank highly relevant documents above less
relevant ones, and does not depress scores on topics for which
no documents achieve the highest grades.
Naturally, the performance levels on prec@10 deteriorate
as the threshold of relevance increases from left to right in
the gure. Performance of the methods with a loose criterion
of relevance shows that it is relatively easy to ll the top
ten places in each merged list with results which match the
query to at least a minimal degree, while the rightmost plot
shows that some methods nearly always fail to include any
highly relevant documents in the top ten.
However, the patterns apparent in the NDCG@10 plot are
also visible in all of the prec@10 plots.
Considering NDCG@10, the\whiskers"in Figure 4 indicate
a very high variance in scores achieved. The GDS SS method
is an extreme example with a proportion of topics achieving
a zero score and another proportion achieving 1.0.
We summarise our observations on the NDCG@10 plots
and conrm them with paired t-tests:
Round-robin methods are generally inferior to the GDS
methods. For example, GDS TS>SPRR (p<0:01).
Even with an oracle prioritising the servers (not shown)
the results are inferior to GDS TS. Although diversity
in result sets is often desirable, the diversity enforced
by round-robin approaches is more hinderance than
help in this setting.
GDS SS is worse than the other GDS methods. For
example, GDS TS>GDS SS (p<0:01).
MW performs no better than the other GDS meth-
ods. The dierence between GDS TS and MW is not
signicant at the 0.05 level.
Figure 4: Overall comparison of the methods on NDCG@10.
LRI is competitive with the GDS methods. The dif-
ference between GDS TS and LRI is not signicant at
the 0.05 level.
LRI is more consistent than other methods|the best
queries perform a little worse than with other methods,
but the worst perform better.
The poor performance of prioritised round-robin is unsur-
prising given that if all ten or more sources supply answers
to a query, no server can contribute more than one result,
even if one can supply many highly relevant documents and
others return low value results.
The poor performance of GDS SS is probably because
some servers supply results with poor or absent snippets.
This is true even of servers in our relatively small testbed
and suggests that a general enterprise search engine will have
to use some sort of fallback, as in GDS TSS or the weighting
methods.
The MW method requires training to learn the appropriate
weights. It is possible that with more training data it would
be able to out-perform the other GDS methods. Another
consequence of the need for training is that the evaluation
method for MW (averaging across folds) is dierent from the
method used to evaluate the other methods.
Craswell et al.[3] found considerable dierences in retrieval
eectiveness for dierent ranking schemes in local re-indexing.
Further research is needed to determine whether other local
ranking functions would be able to outperform GDS TS.
Finally, let us note that we were unable to compare perfor-
mance against a centralised index since we have no access to
the documents in some of the sources (e.g. ANU contacts and
ANU library). The sources are genuinely non-cooperating.
4.2 Query characteristics
It is quite likely that merging methods may perform dif-
ferently across dierent families of query. There are many
47(a) NDCG@10 scores for 21 queries relating to names
of people or organisations (NPO).
(b) NDCG@10 scores for the remaining 23 queries
(OTHER).
Figure 5: Dierences in performance for dierent families of query.
possible ways to divide up the query set. We present in
Figure 5 a performance comparison for queries which relate
to the names of people or organisations (NPO, 21 queries)
with the rest (OTHER, 23).
As can be seen:
The median performance of GDS SS is substantially
better on the NPO set, though variance is still very
high. GDS TSS also appears to perform better.
Local re-indexing (LRI) is also more eective for the
NPO queries.
There is quite a large dierence in performance between
GDS TSS and GDS DTSS on the NPO queries but
almost none on the others.
LMS performs similarly to GDS TSS for NPO queries
but slightly better for OTHER. This may be because
some sources have fewer good results for specic people
or organisations, but those few results are highly useful:
for example, the telephone directory may return only
one result for a person (that person's details) but many
results for other queries (anyone with a similar-sounding
name or aliation). In these cases, LMS will demote
small sources which should in fact be promoted.
Otherwise, observations made on the full query set seem
to also generally apply for each of the families shown here.
Future work may identify query characteristics tending to
lead to better or worse performance of particular methods.
4.3 Correlation
Given the similar results in Figures 3 and 4, it is possible
that the various algorithms are actually doing the same thing:
that is, they might be using dierent methods but ranking
documents the same way. We investigated this possibility by
looking at the correlation between rankings.Table 3 gives, for each pair of algorithms, the degree of
correlation between their rankings. The gures are the mean
correlation (Kendall's ) across all documents for all 44
queries.
Algorithms which always rank all documents the same way
will have mean correlation of 1, while pairs of algorithms
which rank documents independently will have mean corre-
lation of 0. As expected the GDS methods correlate well,
particularly those which use the title eld, while the var-
ious round-robin methods correlate surprisingly well with
each other. The multiple weights and especially the local re-
indexing algorithms produce rankings which are consistently
dierent to all other algorithms (LRI has = 0:28 against
MW, and less than that in all other cases).
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Enterprise search is an important but under-studied prob-
lem, and methods from federated search have promise since
they can combine any number of non-cooperative, heteroge-
neous sources behind a single interface. In many instances,
it is the only viable technique as the gather-and-index model
is not feasible or not possible. We evaluated algorithms in
a setting which is realistic not only for the institution we
studied but for many others.
Result merging remains one of the major outstanding prob-
lems in federated search. In particular, previous evaluations
have not considered the range of sources common to enter-
prise scenarios. Here we show that local re-indexing methods
and methods based on titles and summaries of results achieve
reasonable performance and outperform round-robin meth-
ods over a disparate collection of sources including websites,
sta directory and external social media content|although
these methods do need to adapt to diering document types
and presentations.
Excluding GDS SS and the round-robin methods it seems
that there is no real argument from eectiveness to choose one
48GDS SS
GDS TS
GDS TSS
GDS DTSS
LMS
SR
R
PRR SPR
R
MW LRIGDS SS | 0.66 0.44 0.43 0.66 0.11 0.13 0.16 0.29 0.18
GDS TS | 0.60 0.61 0.98 0.12 0.13 0.17 0.38 0.17
GDS TSS | 0.98 0.58 0.42 0.43 0.47 0.61 0.22
GDS DTSS | 0.59 0.42 0.43 0.47 0.61 0.21
LMS | 0.12 0.14 0.18 0.39 0.18
SRR | 0.91 0.90 0.59 0.16
PRR | 0.93 0.64 0.19
SPRR | 0.64 0.18
MW | 0.28
LRI |
Table 3: Correlations between rankings from dierent algorithms. Shown are the mean statistics across 44 queries.
method over another. The multiple weights method needs
training data and locally re-indexing needs to download text
for each result; locally re-indexing is more consistent than
other methods, but in this environment a method such as
GDS TSS or LMS seems to be a reasonable choice on the
whole. Locally re-indexing may be a good option if users are
sensitive to poor results more than they are to \average" re-
sults. However, it entails slower response and more resources,
and that may exclude it from some applications.
Further work could lead to an extension of the machine-
learned multiple weights method, taking into account query
and source features. It is also possible that it might be
possible to use dierent merging algorithms for dierent
families of queries, especially if queries can be classied
automatically.
Acknowledgements. We thank the participants who pro-
vided relevance judgements. The protocol of Section 2.1 was
approved by the Australian National University's Human
Research Ethics Committee.
6. REFERENCES
[1] P. Bailey, N. Craswell, I. Soboro, P. Thomas,
A. de Vries, and E. Yilmaz. Relevance assessment: Are
judges exchangeable and does it matter? In
Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval , pages 666{674,
2008.
[2] J. P. Callan, Z. Lu, and W. B. Croft. Searching
distributed collections with inference networks. In
Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval , 1995.
[3]N. Craswell, D. Hawking, and P. Thistlewaite. Merging
results from isolated search engines. In Proceedings of
the 10th Australasian Database Conference , pages
189{200. Springer-Verlag, 1999. http:
//david-hawking.net/pubs/craswell_adc99.pdf.
[4] K. J arvelin and J. Kek alainen. Cumulated gain-based
evaluation of IR techniques. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. ,
20(4):422{446, Oct. 2002.
[5] M. Lalmas. Aggregated search. In Advanced Topics in
Information Retrieval , volume 33 of The Information
Retrieval Series, pages 109{123. Springer, 2011.[6] S. Lawrence and C. L. Giles. Inquirus, the NECI meta
search engine. In Proceedings of WWW7, pages 95{105,
1998.
[7] J.-H. Lee. Analyses of multiple evidence combination.
InProc.. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval , pages 267{276,
1997.
[8] R. Manmatha and H. Sever. A formal approach to
score normalization for meta-search. In Proc. Human
Language Technology Research , pages 98{103, 2002.
[9] MindMetre Research. Mind the search gap. Research
report, 2011.
[10] M. Montage and J. Aslam. Relevance score
normalization for metasearch. In Proc. ACM Conf. on
Information and Knowledge Management , pages
427{433, 2001.
[11] Y. Rasolofo, F. Abbaci, and J. Savoy. Approaches to
collection selection and results merging for distributed
information retrieval. In Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR
Conf. on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, pages 191{198, 2001.
[12]Y. Rasolofo, D. Hawking, and J. Savoy. Result merging
strategies for a current news metasearcher. Information
Processing and Management , 39(4):581{609, July 2003.
[13] M. E. Renda and U. Straccia. Web metasearch: rank
vs. score based rank aggregation methods. In
Proceedings of the 2003 ACM Symposium on Applied
Computing, pages 841{846, 2003.
[14] M. Shokouhi and L. Si. Federated search. Foundations
and Trends in Information Retrieval , 5(1):1{102, 2011.
[15]L. Si and J. Callan. A semisupervised learning method
to merge search engine results. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. ,
21(4):457{491, Oct. 2003.
[16] P. Thomas and D. Hawking. Evaluating sampling
methods for uncooperative collections. In
Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval , pages 503{510,
2007.
[17] C. Vespi. From overload to impact: an industry
scorecard on big data business challenges. Oracle
Corporation report, July 2012.
49