The Human Fantasy
Exploring race and ethnicity through Dungeons & Dragons
Samuel, S.H., Heine
Université de Montréal
samuel.heine@umontreal.caAntoine, A.P., Prémont
Université de Montréal
antoine.premont@umontreal.ca
ABSTRACT
The subject of tabletop roleplaying games has many points of in-
terest for researchers, may it be its social and cultural aspects, or
even the games themselves. With the Black Lives Matter movement,
many racial questions have surged in popular discourse. This paper
proposes to study the question of race in many editions of the fan-
tasy roleplaying game Dungeons and Dragons . By using the Player’s
Handbooks, we will show that its diegesis and rules includes a
mostly essentialist definition of race where humans are at the cen-
ter. Depending on the editions, we will show the descriptions of
humans and half-humans (half-elves and half-orcs) point to the
superiority of an imperialist human race that has more in common
with an idealized colonial Europe than a representation of a diverse
humanity.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Race and Ethnicity ;•Sociology ;•Media arts ;
KEYWORDS
Role-Playing, Dungeons & Dragons
ACM Reference Format:
Samuel, S.H., Heine and Antoine, A.P., Prémont. 2021. The Human Fantasy:
Exploring race and ethnicity through Dungeons & Dragons . InThe 16th
International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games (FDG) 2021
(FDG’21), August 03–06, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3472538.3472560
1 INTRODUCTION
“Human” in D&D means everyone, not just fantasy
versions of northern Europeans, and the D&D commu-
nity is now more diverse than it’s ever been. Through-
out the 50-year history of D&D, some of the peoples
in the game—orcs and drow being two of the prime
examples—have been characterized as monstrous and
evil, using descriptions that are painfully reminiscent
of how real-world ethnic groups have been and con-
tinue to be denigrated. That’s just not right, and it’s
not something we believe in. Despite our conscious
efforts to the contrary, we have allowed some of those
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
FDG’21, August 03–06, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada
©2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8422-3/21/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3472538.3472560old descriptions to reappear in the game. We recog-
nize that to live our values, we have to do an even
better job in handling these issues. If we make mis-
takes, our priority is to make things right. (Wizards
of the Coast, 2020)
By this announcement, the team behind the Dungeons & Dragons
roleplaying game reacted to the Black Lives Matter movement and
the more general claims directed against the systemic racism in
many Occidental countries. This context helped to set a spotlight
on the presence of racism in the broader cultural context including
media production and games.
At this point it would be easy to question why there is a link
between racism and a fantasy tabletop game with monsters and
magic, especially since the official message from the game develop-
ment team points at racial problems inside their game. However,
fantasy and science fiction role-playing games have a problematic
relation with the concepts of race and ethnicity. At a surface level,
there seems to be a large difference between how the term “race”
is used to discriminate humans by their physical features and to
describe distinct fictional creatures like orcs, elves and dwarves
that have inherent physical, cultural and mental characteristics that
make them different. However, this perception erases the fact that
fictional races are mostly based on various human communities or
cultures, making the use of this concept highly problematic.
There have been many critics of this situation over the years
even if they only became more widespread, in the public sphere,
quite recently. Nevertheless, numerous writers, scholars and players
participated in this discussion from a variety of standpoint. In
academia, we can cite the work of people like Tanner Higgin who
show that there is a disappearance of blackness, “the ontological
condition of being labeled and understood as Black” (Higgin, 2009,
5), in the diegetic universe of fantasy massively multiplayer online
role-playing games like Everquest (Venant Interactive 1999) and
World of Warcraft (Blizzard 2004) (Higgin, 2009, 3-5). This vision
is even supported by Melissa J. Monson. In her study about racial
essentialism in World of Warcraft , she explains that most races are
based on different human and ethnicized groups, while humans are
still shown as stereotypical medieval white Europeans (Monson,
2012, 48-71). For example, she states that the minotaur-like taurens
are based on stereotypical Native American culture, may it be by
their architectural design or their personality traits (60-61). This is
reinforced by the fact that some essential characteristics are linked
to racial identity (all gnomes are smart and good engineers either by
their stats or their description) and that races are shown as if they
never made contact with others while they were establishing their
culture like if they were enclaved from the rest of the world (61-63).
In the context of a more transmedial approach, Helen Young goes
back to the origin of the fantasy genre to show that most of theFDG’21, August 03–06, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada Antoine Premont and Samuel Heine
books that popularized fantasy, like The Lords of the Rings and the
Conan the Barbarian stories, were made in a context where racial
hierarchy and essentialism were normalized (Young, 2015, 15-35).
Those conceptions were thus transferred to the diegetic universe
of the books and became a part of the genre conventions (Young,
2015, 34-35).
Following these studies, we can see that a very problematic vi-
sion of race has been linked to fantasy since its beginnings and is
still present even in roleplaying games. In this context, our article
wants to know how races are understood and presented in the pop-
ular tabletop roleplaying game Dungeons & Dragons (D&D). More
specifically, we will research how fantasy role-playing games can
help us discuss the current and past constructions of racism and
ethnicity. In this article, we will try to show that the earlier editions
were strongly essentialist in the way they linked class, capacities
and characteristics to race in a human-centric perspective. More-
over, while there have been tendencies towards de-essentialization
of race, there are still numerous cases where races are mainly based
on biological traits contributing to an enduring view of race with
an essentialist otherness that can be linked to a colonial vision of
races. In order to do so, we will first establish the foundation of our
work by defining the concepts used in this article. Then, we will
observe the human and half-human races through both diegetic
descriptions and gameplay characteristics, as we will see that they
are central to how other races are described.
2 DEFINITIONS
2.1 Race and ethnicity
The concept of race is widely seen as problematic because of its
history that links it to colonialism, white supremacy and dehuman-
ization of “others”1. In a more contemporary context, it is important
to understand what is mostly understood when we talk about race
and ethnicity. We can define race as referring to the:
(. . .) dividing [of] humans by observable physical
characteristics, like skin color, while ethnicity refers
to dividing humans by shared culture. Race is not a
fixed biological property but the outcome of racial-
ization: people construct race categories based on su-
perficial physiological properties, like skin color, and
count individuals into them (Little 2013). (Trammell,
2018, 441)
As such, it would be easy to say that race is physical, and ethnicity
is linked to the culture in which you were born. However, race
and ethnicity are social constructs that were created by humans
(Kivisto and Croll, 2012, 13-14). They are not essential qualities
and their meaning can change “across societies and over time.”
(13-14). Race can sometimes include culture, while ethnicity can
reference a complex construct that contains physical, cultural and
economic characteristics. It is hard to say what the concept of race
and ethnicity refers to, while they can be understood differently
from one person to another. In the end, both are used to regroup
humans in categories that can be imposed on them by others to
identify their perceived difference.
1For a more thorough summary of the historical meaning of the word “race” see:
Spencer 2014, 41-64.In D&D and most fantasy universes, we cannot take this concep-
tion as the term race is not used to characterize humans between
them, but to identify other humanoid2races like orcs or elves. This
means that race isn’t a social construct in the diegesis of those
universes, but an essential truth. Orcs aren’t humans with a differ-
ent appearance or culture, they are a race of humanoids with their
own physical, mental and cultural characteristics. In fact, the fifth
edition’s Player’s Handbook describes race as such:
Your choice of race affects many different aspects of
your character. It establishes fundamental qualities
that exist throughout your character’s adventuring
career. [...] For example, a halfling could be a good
choice for a sneaky rogue, a dwarf makes a tough war-
rior, and an elf can be a master of arcane magic. [...]
Each race’s description in this chapter includes infor-
mation to help you roleplay a character of that race,
including personality, physical appearance, features
of society, and racial alignment tendencies. These de-
tails are suggestions to help you think about your
character; adventurers can deviate widely from the
norm for their race. It’s worthwhile to consider why
your character is different, as a helpful way to think
about your character’s background and personality.
(Wizards of the Coast, 2014, 17)
This description represents well how D&D considered race
throughout most of its editions. Each race can determine the per-
sonality, appearance, moral compass and place in the society of
a person may it be in the diegesis or in how they should be role-
played by the participants of the game. As an adventurer, the player
character can be considered as different from the norm of its race.
However, this is considered as an exception to the racial norm. The
player can play a race differently than what the book suggests. Still,
they are doing so in opposition to how their race is supposed to act
in the diegesis.
From there, we can state that race in D&D is used to repre-
sent varying intelligent beings that have mostly essential physical,
mental and cultural qualities that determine most of their iden-
tity. Ethnicity is mostly used to talk about subsets of culture that
are linked to those races and, as such, retain most of its original
meaning.
2.2 Role-Playing Games
D&D is often regarded as the “grandfather” of all role-playing
games (Appelcline, 2014, 6, 16 ; Peterson, 2012, xi-xii, xvii). While
there were other forms of free-form role-play, the advent of D&D
in 1974 is a definite point in time at which a new type of game was
released. Yet, despite the scholarly interest that developed around
role-playing games, there is no great consensus about what “role-
playing game” actually means. The problem is twofold.
First, “role-playing game” is a term applied to a variety of phe-
nomena. Zagal and Deterding refer to these as “forms”, or ways in
which role-playing games are played. They highlight four promi-
nent forms of role-playing games, which are tabletop, live-action,
2In this context, the term refers to any creature that has a human-like appearance or
form.The Human Fantasy FDG’21, August 03–06, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada
single-player computer and multiplayer online. (Zagal and Deter-
ding, 2018, 27). These forms refer to general ways in which role-
playing games are played, and mostly concern different mediums
(pen-and-paper, computer, etc.). Second, the definitions so far have
tried to capture the “essence” of role-playing games and encompass
all of its aspects. While the notion of “form” informs us of broad
ways to “role-play”, it does not give us the whole picture, as there
are multiple ways to play, even inside a “form”. Here Zagal and
Deterding add:
However, because ‘’role-playing games” is a social
category created by humans, it has no unchanging,
context-independent essence. Hence, if we ask for a
definition of ‘’role-playing games”, we can only refer
toeither how particular groups at particular points
in time empirically use the word and organize ac-
tions and the material world around it orhow we,
as a scientific observer, choose to use the word to
foreground and understand a particular perspective:
viewing RPGs as a performance or as a virtual econ-
omy, etc. (Zagal and Deterding, 2018, 47)
In the case of this study, we fall in the latter category highlighted
by the authors. We wish to define role-playing games in regards
to representation and ethnicity. However, we can still draw from
other authors in order to consider some features essential for our
study.
While the status of role-playing games as games has been debated
by various scholars (as they stray from the norm of “classical games”
or otherwise “standard model” of games)3, the presence of rules is
a recurring element of tabletop role-playing games (Cover, 2010,
168 ; Mackay, 2001, 7). Those rules are heavily influenced by the
heritages of wargames (Appelcline, 2014, 8-9 ; Cover, 2010, 8), which
implies to a degree the uses of statistics (Peterson, 2012, 315).
Another element noted by scholars is the importance of fiction
and narrative in role-playing games (Cover, 2010, 8-9 ; Mackay,
2001, 4-5). The nature of what each author implies by “fiction” or
“narrative” is broad and varied. What must be understood from this
statement is that tabletop role-playing games are not solely about
rules and numbers, but rather that those elements are intertwined
with fictional events occurring in the game. The relative importance
of those fictional elements may vary, but are always present.
While other elements often come up when discussing tabletop
role-playing games (such as their social features based on the ne-
cessity of multiple players), in the case of this study, however, we
will look at D&D through the lenses of its game system (rules and
mechanics) and its game setting (fictional universe).
2.3 Methodology
Due to its status as a cultural icon, recognition and presence through
history, we have decided to center our study on the specific tabletop
role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons . However, this did very little
to narrow down the amount of content to sift through. Between
rulebooks, adventure modules, setting books, various magazines
3Both Juul, Salen and Zimmerman mention that role-playing games do not quite fit in
their models of classical games, be it for the lack of an endpoint (or quantifiable out-
come) (Salen and Zimmerman 2004, 81) or the flexibility of the game rules, negotiated
between players and groups (Juul 2005, 44).(such as the Dragon Magazine ) or officially licensed material (like
the novels and comic books), there is no shortage of content to
explore and analyze in regards to D&D.
For our study, we have decided to restrict ourselves to the most
appropriate pieces of content, which are the core rulebooks4des-
tined to players of the game, most commonly known as “Player’s
Handbook”. These books contain all the information for players to
piece together a character in order to play, including sections on
the various playable races.
We have decided to restrict ourselves to these books for a variety
of reasons. First, these are widely known and somewhat easy to
access. They are essential to play in any specific edition and among
the most widely spread. Second, these books always come out
at the same time as a new edition of D&D. This gives us many
points in time to analyze how races are envisioned. If we were to
consider a wider array of books, we’d have more fluctuating results,
as that may not represent how the topic of race was envisioned and
designed at the launch of an edition. Third, these books are official
material and main rulebooks. During the lifespan of any edition of
D&D, a variety of supplements are bound to be published, some
that could potentially be relevant to this study. However, the sheer
volume of publications could make it harder to track down these
books and to account for all of them in an orderly fashion. Even
more so, the varying degrees of oversight the publishing company
puts in these supplements makes them even harder to consider as
they might not be as standardized as the core rulebooks.
We will then consider the contents of the various Player’s Hand-
book through the official5editions of Dungeons & Dragons , which
we will call OD&D (Tactical Studies Rules, 1974), 1st edition AD&D
(Tactical Studies Rules, 1978), 2nd edition AD&D (Tactical Studies
Rules, 1989), 3rd edition D&D (Wizards of the Coast, 2000), 4rth
edition D&D (Wizards of the Coast, 2008) and finally 5th edition
D&D (Wizards of the Coast, 2014). In these books, we will consider
the chapter describing the various playable races available to play-
ers. From these sections, we will analyze both how they describe
races in diegetic terms and how races affect gameplay through their
mechanics. While we will focus on specific parts of these books,
we will also consider the notion of character classes (as they have
a relationship with races) and the rules of the games in general (in
order to better understand the impacts of race in gameplay).
This method allows us to state both how, at a specific point in
time, the subject of race is presented (and played) in an edition of
D&D, and how it can change between two editions.
3 THE HUMAN FANTASY
Humans, in D&D, are in a unique position compared to other races.
As the players are themselves humans, it would be easy to directly
analyze the other races and ignore humanity as they may be the
4Core Rulebooks refer to the three main books containing the rules to play the game
as well as overall setting (Tresca 2011, 59), mostly known as “Player’s Handbook”,
“Dungeon Master’s Guide” and “Monster Manual”. While some editions of D&D did
not name their books in the exact same fashion, they had similar contents and are, as
such, considered Core Rulebooks
5There are more than five editions of D&D. Most notably, both 1st ed. AD&D and 2nd
ed. AD&D had “basic” sets that, while intended to be compatible, ended up becoming
different games (Appelcline, 2014, 32, 34). The 3rd edition had a large overhaul labeled
“3.5” and the 4th had a similar treatment with the “Dungeons & Dragons Essentials”.
These semi-editions will not be considered since they mostly build upon an existing
edition rather than fundamentally change it.FDG’21, August 03–06, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada Antoine Premont and Samuel Heine
“basic” race. However, this would be overlooking how much humans
are at the center of most official D&D diegetic universes. This is
especially obvious when looking at how other races are presented.
In OD&D, humans don’t really have a description of their own.
They are the basic race and they don’t have special rules or limi-
tations compared to others. For example, dwarven fighters have
some limitations on their level progression and their abilities while
the human fighter is only limited by the normal rule of this combat
class (Tactical Studies Rules, 1974, 6-7). In this context, humanity is
seen as the “norm”, from a statistical perspective, while the others
add new specificities and rules. This situation is also present in the
first edition of AD&D, as humans have no:
penalties nor bonuses, as they are established as the
norm upon which these subtractions or additions for
racial stock are based. [ . . .] As they are the rule rather
than the exception, the basic information given al-
ways applies to humans, and racial changes are noted
for differences as applicable for non-human or part-
human stocks. (Tactical Studies Rules, 1978, 17)
As such, non-human races are quite literally characterized by
their difference from humans, may it be culturally or physically.
This conception becomes less and less overt with subsequent edi-
tions as even the second edition of AD&D erases this description
for a more generic one. This section is dedicated to how humans are
depicted in the Player’s Handbook of each edition. We will first see
how they are described, after which we will analyze their in-game
rules.
3.1 Being general is specific
Humankind is rapidly characterized by the fact that “Although hu-
mans are treated as a single race in the AD&D game, they come in
all the varieties we know on Earth.” (Tactical Studies Rules, 1989,
24). They still are the race with the least description in the book
and some of the later editions use them as a point of comparison for
some characteristics6. However, we notice a change of paradigm as
humans begin to have their own specialty which is that they are
diverse. While other races have their personality, physical appear-
ance and intelligence described in details, like the dwarves who
“are stout and tough but tend to be gruff and reserved” (Wizards of
the Coast, 2000, 14), humans are mostly seen as:
the descendants of pioneers, conquerors, traders, trav-
elers, refugees, and other people on the move. As a
result, human lands are a mix of people—physically,
culturally, religiously, and politically. Hardy or fine,
light-skinned or dark, showy or austere, primitive or
civilized, devout or impious, humans run the gamut.
(Wizards of the Coast, 2000, 12)
Their main characteristic is that they have none and that they
tend to travel, conquer and colonize everywhere. They are also
described as changing and evolving rapidly, despite their shorter
lifespan (Wizards of the Coast, 2000, 13). Humanity, as written in
the Player’s Handbook, is in a position of superiority compared
to the other races, may it be by their population, their diversity,
6For example, dwarves are said to be: “almost as heavy as humans.” in the third edition
(Wizards of the Coast, 2000, 14).their geographical space or their culture. In fact, the fourth and
fifth editions of D&D directly link them to the concept of Empire.
It is important to understand that:
the very logic of Empire is tied up with how it recon-
ceives spatiality. From the “Great Game” played for the
possession of Central Asia to the expansionist logic of
No Man’s Sky, the mechanism of empire is based on
a geopolitics through which it lays claim to a consol-
idated space and on further expansion. (Mukherjee,
2017, 30)
Empire has some similarity to the concept of “kingdom” and
“country” as it represents a type of geopolitical space. However,
it includes a notion of expansion that makes conquest, may it be
military, economic or cultural, at the center of its identity. The
normalization or glorification of empires in fantasy, science fiction
and even historical fiction is an important phenomenon that would
sadly require more attention than what we can give in this article.
Still, it is important to specify that the human Empire described in
the fourth edition is benevolent and diverse. For example:
The human empire of Nerath, the last great world
power, united many different peoples. Most of the
human towns that have survived the empire’s fall are
fortified bastions against the encroaching darkness.
When elven forests are razed or dwarven mines over-
run, the survivors often flee to the nearest human
town for protection. Despite the far reach and power
of Nerath, humans in the present day are a scattered
and divided people. Dozens of small kingdoms, fief-
doms, and free cities have arisen from Nerath’s ruins,
and many of these realms are petty, weak, or isolated.
Tensions and misunderstandings among them often
precipitate skirmishes, espionage, betrayal, and even
open warfare. (Wizards of the Coast, 2008, 47)
Empires are presented as a unifying force of old that left only
strife and rivalry behind. Even with its disappearance, humanity
stays as a haven open to other races. In fact, they act as a stable and
welcoming race. One of the problems with this description is that
they describe a diverse group prone to dissension and infighting as
being relatively homogenous in their acceptance of others. While
most other races are described as having set relationships with
particular groups, humans are seen as accepting of others. In fact,
the second edition of AD&D state that:
Humans are also more social and tolerant than most
other races, accepting the company of elves, dwarves,
and the like with noticeably less complaint. Because
of these abilities and tendencies, humans have be-
come significant powers within the world and often
rule empires that other races (because of their racial
tendencies) would find difficult to manage. (Tactical
Studies Rules, 1978, 23)
The fact that they can build empires is seen as a good charac-
teristic that the others are unable to do because of “their racial
tendencies”. This acceptance that they are socially superior, and
more accepting is troubling. However, the discourse of dominationThe Human Fantasy FDG’21, August 03–06, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada
is what seems the most problematic and, sadly, represented in sub-
sequent editions. Other than the empire of Nerath of the fourth
edition, the fifth edition state:
Perhaps it is because of their shorter lives that they
strive to achieve as much as they can in the years they
are given. Or maybe they feel they have something
to prove to the elder races, and that’s why they build
their mighty empires on the foundation of conquest
and trade. Whatever drives them, Humans are the
innovators, the achievers, and the pioneers of the
worlds. (Wizards of the Coast, 2014, 29)
They are said to be a newer and ambitious race attempting to
prove itself with territorial expansion may it be by conquering other
territories or colonizing new lands. Human empires are shown to
be a good or, at the very least, a neutral phenomenon. Even if other
races are said to have empires, like the dragonborns of the fourth
edition (Wizards of the Coast, 2008, 35), they are mostly linked to
humans while being disconnected, in the player’s handbooks at
least, from most of the negative qualities that empires bring. As A.
Martin Wainwright said in the context of historical video games:
If developers omit collateral damage or past atrocities
in order to glorify warfare or the past then it’s fair
enough to criticize the effort. If, on the other hand,
developers omit certain symbols or atrocities because
they fear that their inclusion may encourage people
to glorify them once again, then the decision is more
understandable. Nevertheless, no matter how under-
standable the reasons for omitting or diminishing the
portrayal of historical violence, doing so compromises
the presentation of the past. It may sometimes be nec-
essary, but players should be aware that it’s occurring.
(Wainwright, 2019, 207)
If we modify this notion to our subject, the adaptation of real
concepts, like empire or pioneering, in the fantasy diegesis of D&D
is problematic, as it tends to diminish or erase the negative char-
acteristics behind them. The closest to a more morally dubious
human empire is the tiefling empire of the fourth edition, as they
are descendants of humans who made pacts with devils (Wizards of
the Coast, 2008, 49). Even there, this corruption transformed them
into another race that are half devils. Non-human empires aren’t all
described as evil. However all morally problematic empires aren’t
made by humans or rapidly become inhuman. Evidently, looking at
other D&D material will show a more complex picture. However,
we mustn’t forget that most players will learn about the different
races from the player’s handbooks and that the other books or
materials aren’t necessarily made by the same team or with the
same vision. This is especially important since the empire, and even
the kingdoms or cities, described in the books can be linked to an
occidental centric vision of humanity. They are shown as orderly
refuge for others who live in difficult situations in a way that seems
to replicate an idealized vision of how wealthy occidental countries
welcome immigrants and refugees. This could even be linked to the
description of stable institutions as a human characteristic in the
third and fifth editions. In fact, the fifth edition explains that:
Where a single elf or dwarf might take on the respon-
sibility of guarding a special location or a powerfulsecret, humans found sacred orders and institutions
for such purposes. While dwarf clans and halfling
elders pass on the ancient traditions to each new gen-
eration, human temples, governments, libraries, and
codes of law fix their traditions in the bedrock of his-
tory. (Wizards of the Coast, 2014, 30)
This citation is somewhat disturbing and clearly ethnocentric as
traditional governments are seen as not human. With this logic, it
seems perplexing to describe humanity as diverse while devaluing
more traditional organizations that were or are still being used by
real humans. This especially accentuates the exclusion of minorities
that didn’t have the same political and social structure as medieval
Europe. As such, it would be hard to link this description to Native
Americans, some African ethnic groups or even some European
minorities. In this light, we can hardly describe D&D humans as
not being Eurocentric. As we said in our introduction, most stud-
ies show fantasy humans as mostly European and D&D isn’t an
exception, at least from the second edition of AD&D. The more
they are described, the more they become a description of occiden-
tal civilization or at least of the wealthy and powerful. There are
clear efforts to make them represent all of humanity. Sadly, those
efforts go mostly to waste as the description of the “basic human”
is incompatible with many cultures. All this, while some races are
clearly inspired by the real stereotypes, culture or history of other
ethnic groups, may it be by their personality or cultural traits. This
makes a somewhat essentialist picture of humanity as the leaders of
the “civilized” world, where intrinsically, they organize themselves
under a single political system. Other political systems are either
linked to the essence of other races or are part of a minority of
exceptions.
In the end, humans are diverse, but homogenous. They are wel-
coming, but conquerors. They have a short life, but their empires
and their institutions dominate for ages. They are stable, but am-
bitious and ever-changing. They are the youngest race, but their
population dominates most territories as if no one was there before.
Humans represent the cultural and geopolitical force that dominate
those universes even if there exist many other races. They have
more in common with a glorified version of European colonial em-
pires that is ever expanding and progressing while forgetting the
victims hidden behind those myths.
The fictional setting which describes the diegetic information
in D&D does not, however, fully inform us on how races are rep-
resented. We now have to consider how D&D as a game is played,
and how this affected essentialist representations of races seen so
far.
3.2 “Human” is a unit of measurement
As far as rules go, the first thing used to distinguish different races
is through ability score improvements. Every creature in D&D is
represented through six core attributes7. Every race usually has
both bonuses and penalties to these six attributes in order to repre-
sent their biological traits. Every creature, except humans. In most
editions, humans have no modifications whatsoever to their base
attributes.
7These are: Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom and Charisma.FDG’21, August 03–06, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada Antoine Premont and Samuel Heine
In a way, this sets the humans of D&D as the average from
where it is possible to describe the other fantasy races. This is not
so surprising when we consider how the fantasy elements of the
game were implemented and considered. As Jon Peterson says:
Even more than in Chainmail, the fantasy setting of
Dungeons & Dragons is a generic setting, an amal-
gamation of various fantasy sources rather than the
world of any particular author. Its construction was a
taxonomic exercise, incorporating a superset of the
elements that appear in the corpus of fantasy fiction
and, through a system of quantification, providing
something of a “grand unified theory” of how all these
entities compare to one another and might interact
with one another. (Peterson, 2012, 82-83)
From this perspective, it is easy to see how humans are classified
as the “degree zero” of physical traits compared to other fantasy
races. From the human template, all other fantasy races are depicted
both in diegetic terms and statistics:
Human characters are neither given penalties nor
bonuses, as they are established as the norm upon
which these subtractions or additions for racial stock
are based. (...) As they are the rule rather than the ex-
ception, the basic information given always applies to
humans, and racial changes are noted for differences
as applicable for non-human or part-human stocks.
(Tactical Studies Rules, 1978, 17-18)
The rules of D&D regarding races, however, affect more than
these six core attributes.
3.3 Beyond the attributes, the traits
In most cases, it is possible to see additional abilities provided with
various races. Most of them have other biological traits, such as the
ability to see in darkness or innate resistance against various effects,
such as poisons or magic. These traits are physical and essentialist.
For instance, all elves are described as having keen eyes and ears
(compared to humans). In the 3rd edition of D&D, this trait is imple-
mented in the rules by giving bonuses when rolling dices regarding
auditory or ocular perception. As a result, elven characters will
most often have superior senses compared to other races8. This
ability essentializes the fact that all elves have acute senses, without
considerations to the fact that some might be visually impaired
with myopia or color-blindness.
Essentialism is not, however, limited to physical traits. In most
editions of D&D we can see abilities given to different races tied to
cultures. These often take the form of pieces of knowledge applied
to features of a race. One of such examples is the notion of “weapon
proficiency”. This rule in the game allows characters to use weapons
for which they are proficient. Most races have, in a way or another,
a few proficiencies with various weapons (or tools), such as elves
with the longbow or longsword (Tactical Studies Rules, 1978, 16
; Tactical Studies Rules, 1989, 21 ; Wizards of the Coast, 2000, 16)
or dwarves with axes or hammers (Tactical Studies Rules, 1974,
8Through character progression, it is possible for non-elven characters to develop
superior hearing and eyesight. At character creation, however, elves will retain this
superiority.7)9. This generalizes the wielding of these weapons as a part of
the DNA of these races, as if from birth they intrinsically know
how to use these, no matter what calling individuals may have or
culture they live into. Although it would be possible to argue that
some of these societies mandate military training (and potentially
military service) and as such standardizes knowledge of how to
use certain weapons, the information of the game setting in the
Player’s Handbook fails to confirm this.
This then raises a few questions. Humankind, compared to other
races, has been described so far by the setting as diverse and flexible
people. How are these traits represented in the rules of D&D?
3.4 The power of choice
While this hasn’t been the case through all editions of D&D, hu-
mankind has often benefited from options whereas other races
were locked into specific benefits. The 4th and 5th editions of D&D
eventually gave bonuses to core attributes to humans. However,
those bonuses could be applied anywhere, while other races were
limited by specific biological traits.
This notion of choice permeates all other traits that humans
might have gained through the various editions of D&D. While
exactly what humans might gain as benefit depends on the edition
of the game, it usually is worded in a way that allows human
characters to choose skills, feats, languages or other abilities. This
usually allows human characters in the game to be both flexible
and specialized. Yet, what sets apart humans from other races does
not lie in these abilities.
In D&D, classes are a loose term used to define the type of
character you are playing, much like a trade or profession. They
define what your characters will or will not be allowed to do in-
game and where most of their powers and abilities lie. After the
core attributes and race, this is one of the main features of a player
character and where most of its abilities during gameplay will stem
from.
Humans in D&D have the special ability to be able to select
any class, while all the other races are severely limited in that
regard. While this is not true for all editions of D&D (the 4th and
5th removed those limitations), the early editions were very keen
on that feature. AD&D1, AD&D2 and 3rd edition D&D all have
different rules in regards to race and class progression, in all of
which humans are favored. This then begs the following question:
how relevant is that advantage?
As it turns out, the ability to choose any class is noted as es-
pecially powerful by the authors of the game: “Each racial stock
has advantages and disadvantages, although in general humans
are superior to the others for reasons you will discover as you
read on.” (Tactical Studies Rules, 1978, 13). In the early editions of
the game, humans benefited from classes in two major ways: they
could progress as much as they wanted and had privileged access
to desirable classes.
The first edition of AD&D is probably the clearest in this regard.
Each class had tiers of advancement, mostly represented by names.
For instance, clerics were stratified from Acolyte (at level 1) to High
9The 3rd edition of D&D introduced a weapon called the dwarven waraxe, which was
considered to be an exotic weapon except for those trained to use it (which would
be dwarves). In the book we consulted, however, there is no mention for dwarves to
automatically be proficient with such a weapon.The Human Fantasy FDG’21, August 03–06, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada
Priest (at levels 10-11) (Tactical Studies Rules, 1978, 20). Except
humans, all races were limited in the maximum progression they
could have (Tactical Studies Rules, 1978, 14). This meant that the
majority of races could not attain the highest levels of power in a
single class. The names of the class tiers also imply that a nonhuman
character could never become a Lord (highest tiers of the Fighter
[Tactical Studies Rules, 1978, 22]) or attain any other high status in
society.
Humans also have access to some classes that are either heavily
restricted or unique to humans as well. Both the Monk and Paladin
are unique to humans, while the Druid, Ranger and Illusionist are
heavily restricted (Tactical Studies Rules, 1978, 14). As a result,
humans have access to both the highest tiers of play and to others
either unique or very restricted options. AD&D2 worked in a similar
fashion. While some class options opened up to different races,
humans retained the ability both to pick any of their choice and to
have exclusive rights to others, such as the Paladin (Tactical Studies
Rules, 1989, 27).
The 3rd edition of D&D worked in a very different way, introduc-
ing a system called the “favored class”. For each race, the rulebook
would specify a single class to be “favored”. Humans, however, have
the choice to pick whichever class to be their favorite. The rules for
favorite classes are rather obscure, resist easy summary and do not
apply often during normal play. It can, however, be summarized as
a penalty to the character progression if such characters stray too
far from their favorite class. This system is a clear departure from
the essentialism seen in the previous editions, as the rules do not
explicitly forbid the combination of certain races and classes. More-
over, unless specific circumstances are met, human and nonhuman
characters can progress at the same rate and attain the same level
tiers.
3.5 Humans have essentially been determined
The 3rd edition is probably the best one to highlight a turning point
in the way race was envisioned from a gameplay perspective. Ear-
lier editions of D&D characterized race as an unchanging essence,
where humans were the exception to the norm, able to become
anything they wanted to be. Later editions of D&D strayed away
from this model, enabling other races to choose their careers of
choice without restriction.
Biological traits, however, still describe races in the game sys-
tem. Moreover, with the loss of privileged access to certain classes,
humans gained bonuses in their basic attributes. Humans, however,
could decide which attributes to enhance where other races did not
have this choice, describing again the flexibility of humankind. This
change to the game system does stray further away from essential-
ism, although not as much as we might originally think. Of all the
six core attributes, not all are as valuable to all classes. Warriors
will often favor constitution or strength to brawl on the frontlines,
rogues will need to be dexterous to blend in the shadows or pick
locks, wizards require a high intelligence score to store all their
knowledge, and so forth.
This lends to some races excelling in some classes more than
others. Dwarves or half-orcs, described with bonuses to constitu-
tion or strength, will often outperform halflings or gnomes in a
warrior-like class. While not exactly as essentialist as the earlyeditions of D&D, the bonuses to the core attributes of a race have
a definite impact on the gameplay experience and steers towards
certain classes more than others, resulting in a very deterministic
perspective. This, however, does not affect humans since they can
apply the bonuses to core attributes where they desire, resulting in
humankind being able to perform in any class and role.
There is one area, however, we still haven’t really explored. While
the distinction between humans and “non-humans” (dwarves, elves,
etc.), is clear, we still haven’t touched on the subject of demihumans,
or half-humans (namely the half-elf and the half-orc). We will now
observe how the traits of humans seen thus far are applied to these.
4 WHAT ABOUT THE OTHER HALVES?
4.1 Half-elves don’t understand fractions
Instinctively, we could suppose that the biological traits of the non-
human parentage would simply be cut by half, as only half the
genes are carried over. This, however, is not always the case. Elves
in AD&D1 and AD&D2 benefited from an ability to resist certain
spells with a 90% chance of success (Tactical Studies Rules, 1978, 16
; Tactical Studies Rules, 1989, 21). While we could suppose that half-
elves would receive half this benefit (for a 45% chance of success),
they gain this ability with a 30% chance of success (Tactical Studies
Rules, 1978, 17 ; Tactical Studies Rules, 1989, 22). Inversely, some
traits of elven parentage are carried through entirely. Their ability
to detect hidden doors is passed on to half-elves unaltered in these
editions (Tactical Studies Rules, 1978, 16-17 ; Tactical Studies Rules,
1989, 21-22). They also have a wider variety of choices in regards
to classes (compared to elves), yet are limited by their maximum
character progression and level in these classes.
The 3rd edition of D&D further exemplifies these notions. Half-
elves only receive half the bonuses to the senses elves usually gain,
yet are considered “full elves” in regards to special abilities and
effects (such as wielding an item with racial restrictions). While
they do not gain the full flexibility of humans in regards to choices
in skills and feats, they are not bound by a specific favored class
(Wizards of the Coast, 2000, 18).
In 4rth edition D&D, half-elves gain small bonuses from both
parents, as well as the ability to further progress by gaining perks
that would otherwise be exclusive to either humans or elves. In a
similar fashion, the 5th edition combines both elements of choice
(in skills or core attributes) and biological traits, namely the “fey
ancestry” ability describing their peculiar lineage (Wizards of the
Coast, 2014, 39).
As a result, the game systems described half-elves in a wide
variety of manners, with no clear consistency. We can, however, see
a pattern emerging, similar to humankind, where half-elves slowly
gain some form of choices, while still inheriting from biological
traits inherent to their elven lineage.
Finally, half-elves do not share the cultural knowledge intrinsic to
elves, namely the proficiency with bows and swords. While this does
remove the ability to wield these weapons from the genetic material
of a half-elf, it also fails to account for a cultural environment, such
as a half-elf raised by an elven community, where he could be taught
with military training in the same way an elf would.
Half-elves, though, have parents in both human and elf, two
playable races from the Player’s Handbook for which we haveFDG’21, August 03–06, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada Antoine Premont and Samuel Heine
access to rules. Half-orcs do not, since orcs are classified as monsters
and enemies. Hence, we cannot compare both sides of its lineage.
We can, however, still draw some information from the way the
rules of D&D depicted them.
4.2 Outside the norm, the half-orcs
Interestingly enough, half-orcs have not been featured in all editions
of D&D. Namely, AD&D2 and D&D 4th edition. The reason for their
omission is, however, variable. AD&D2 removed them in reaction
to the bad press generated by concerned groups which linked D&D
to Satanism, witchcraft and other negative affiliations (Appelcline,
2014, 79-80, 83). The 4th edition of D&D eventually featured the
half-orc, although in the 2nd Player’s Handbook which falls outside
the scope of this study.
From a rule’s perspective, half-orcs share next to none of the
characteristics of humans. While AD&D1 allowed them to access a
wider variety of classes (despite a heavy level restriction) (Tactical
Studies Rules, 1978, 17), it is the only “human” trait half-orcs benefit
from in all editions.
Half-orcs are also the only race in the player’s handbook to di-
verge from the usual core attributes repartition. In both AD&D1
and 3rd edition D&D, half-orcs have two of their core attributes
decreased for a single increase, while every other race with alter-
ations to their attributes have one increase and one decrease. This
is described in the 3rd edition as “Half-orcs are strong, but their orc
lineage makes them dull and crude.” (Wizards of the Coast, 2000,
19). Moreover, much like the half-elves, half-orcs are considered as
orcs for the purposes of special abilities and effects.
This depicts the half-orc as a race of its own rather than the
hybrid of a human and an orc, benefitting from the traits of both.
Interestingly enough, half-orcs are mostly essentialist, even having
a favored class in the 3rd edition (Wizards of the Coast, 2000, 19)
while the half-elf does not (in a similar fashion to humans). The
fact that half-orcs gain the intrinsic ability to intimidate in D&D
5th edition reinforces this idea, while (strangely) fire breathing
two-legged dragon-like creatures don’t (Wizards of the Coast, 2014,
34, 41).
It seems that the only inheritance half-orcs gain from the human
heritage is to transcend the status of monsters and enemies, by
becoming a playable race in the player’s handbook and thus gaining
“humanity” to what is otherwise described as nothing more than a
beast.
4.3 An uneven description
In AD&D1, the half-elves and half-orcs are only succinctly described
as being races that are not a race in themselves but the offspring
of others (Tactical Studies Rules, 1978, 17). However, some ele-
ments that will be important for future editions are already present.
The half-elves are only described as being “found amongst both
elvenkind and men” (17) confirming a link to both races. The half-
orcs offer a more troubling description: “Orcs are fecund and create
many cross-breeds, most of the offspring of such being typically
orcish. However, some one-tenth of orc-human mongrels are suffi-
ciently non-orcish to pass for human” (Tactical Studies Rules, 1978,
17). The first thing that can be seen is the usage of the terms “cross-
breed” and “mongrel” that paint a negative picture of this race thatseem to be tainting the blood of the human half. This is added to
the fact that only 10% of half-orcs are considered sufficiently close
to humans to pass as one. In itself, it only seems like a weird choice.
Sadly, it becomes clearer when we read that “it is assumed that
player characters which are of half-orc race are within the superior
l0%, they have certain advantages.” (Tactical Studies Rules, 1978,
17). Not all half-orcs are equal and those who are deemed as supe-
rior are those who are the less “orcish”. As such, most of them are
considered as inhuman and undesirable while half-elves are more
readily accepted. It would be hard not to link this discrimination
of orcish half-orcs with old colonial practices like phrenology10.
Phrenology was indeed used to show typical European as mentally
superior and less criminally incline than other races by using their
skull measurements even going as far as comparing Africans to
monkeys (Bank, 1996, 388-394). Most half-orcs are considered less
mentally capable not only because of their skull, but of their in-
human appearance. A situation that is even more overt when we
consider that, in the fantasy genre, “The racial logic which attaches
physical characteristics – saliently skin colour – to non-physical
attributes is sustained across six decades and multiple media, as
are the anti-Black stereotypes that are invoked by the particulars
of orc bodies.” (Young, 2015, 108).
This disappears in the second AD&D edition as the half-orcs are
no more present in the book, while the half-elves are still there and
gain a more substantial description. They are said to be “hand-some
folk” with the good features of each of their races. They mingle
freely with either race” (Tactical Studies Rules, 1989, 14). They are
seen as mostly accepted by others and as living in human or elven
communities. It is still surprising that the manual considers that
only half-elves with more or equal elven ancestry are considered
while others are only human. The fact that someone can have
only human characteristics isn’t impossible and it is evident that
advanced genetic knowledge was less easily accessible at the time.
However, it doesn’t make much sense to have such a clear-cut with
today’s understanding of genetics and still seem oddly specific for
a short description of the race. It almost shows human influence as
corrupting the perfection of the elves, which seem to be the case as
we have seen in their characteristics.
The third edition of D&D brings many changes in the description
of half-humans. Half-elves now include a wider diversity of ancestry
as it now includes “second generation” born from “parents who
themselves are partly human and partly elven.” (Wizards of the
Coast, 2000, 18). They also gain a more “in between” description.
In fact:
If raised by elves, the half-elf grows with astounding
speed, reaching maturity within two decades. The
half-elf becomes an adult long before she has had time
to learn the intricacies of elven art and culture, or even
grammar. She leaves behind her childhood friends,
becoming physically an adult but culturally still a
child by elven standards. Typically, she leaves her
elven home, which is no longer familiar, and finds her
10“Phrenology was a science of character analysis based on the theory that the human
mind could be divided into thirty-seven faculties with distinct locations in the brain.
[. . .] Although initially framed as a key to individual psychology, the phrenological
system soon became widely applied as a theory of racial difference.” (Bank, 1996,
388-389).The Human Fantasy FDG’21, August 03–06, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada
way among humans. If, on the other hand, she is raised
by humans, the half-elf finds herself different from
her peers: more aloof, more sensitive, less ambitious,
and slower to mature. Some half-elves try to fit in
among humans, while others find their identities in
their difference. Most find places for themselves in
human lands, but some feel like outsiders all their
lives. (Wizards of the Coast, 2000, 17)
This quote perfectly summarizes the half-elves. They are stuck
in a limbo between two worlds while being unable to perfectly
fit, to the point where “They make excellent ambassadors and go-
betweens (except between elves and humans, where each side sus-
pects the half-elf of favoring the other). ” (Wizards of the Coast, 2000,
18). They still are described as having the best of both worlds while
having a shorter lifespan than elves (17-18). This can be linked
to the situation of the “half blooded” protagonist present in many
narrative media. As Timothy Yun Hui Tsu explains, while analyzing
the representation of Sino-Japanese in the novel The Town That
Never Sleeps of Hase Seishu (1996), Hase:
highlights the radical otherness of this world by refer-
ring repeatedly to the double handicap of the story’s
protagonist. As a “half blood, ” Ryu has never been ac-
cepted into the inner circle of the Chinese syndicates
with whom he conducts business; even his Chinese
foster father ultimately betrays him. Furthermore, his
lack of proficiency in Chinese prevents him from fully
comprehending the people and events around him.
(Tsu, 2011, 144)
While not linking elves or humans to criminality, we can still
see that the role of in between “half blood” isn’t limited to fantasy
universes and can be linked to more contemporary settings. The
half-orcs don’t have the same treatment while still having some
similarities. These persons are described as being born in uncivilized
land where contact between human’s tribes and orcs barbarians
are common (Wizards of the Coast, 2000, 18). They are said to be:
(. . .) short-tempered and sullen. They would rather
act than ponder and would rather fight than argue.
Those who are successful, however, are those with
enough self-control to live in a civilized land, not the
crazy ones. Half-orcs love simple pleasures such as
feasting, drinking, boasting, singing, wrestling, drum-
ming, and wild dancing. Refined enjoyments such as
poetry, courtly dancing, and philosophy are lost on
them. At the right sort of party, a half-orc is an asset.
At the duchess’s grand ball, he’s a liability. (Wizards
of the Coast, 2000, 18)
The link between humanlike appearance and superiority, from
AD&D, are replaced by the uneven ability to “self-control” their
innate violence. Unlike the half-elves, they are seen as doing better
with their orcish parents than with others, as they are feared or
hated by many races (Wizards of the Coast, 2000, 19). As such,
they are not just in between two worlds, they are either outside
both or clearly closer to their orcish family. Where half-elves act as
outsiders looking for their place in the world, half-orcs are closer
to an uncivilized barbarian that sometime, when it can control its
inner violence, try to integrate himself in a hostile civilized world.Even this integration is seen as dangerous as the book explains
that “Some are reserved, trying not to draw attention to themselves.
Others demonstrate piety and goodheartedness as publicly as they
can (whether or not such demonstrations are genuine). Others sim-
ply try to be so tough that others have no choice but to accept them. ”
(Wizards of the Coast, 2000, 19). The fact that they face hardship
to be accepted, in isolation, isn’t necessarily a problem and could
lead to some interesting criticism of how people can be othered or
hated because of their origin. However, the fact that they can falsely
show goodness and piety seem oddly specific. This is especially
troublesome when we see that they tend to pray Gruumsh, the
god of the orcs, which is clearly identified as a god of chaos, war
and evil (Wizards of the Coast, 2000, 31). This makes them very
close to the figure of the barbarian described by Jean-Charles Ray,
who describes it as: “expressing a confrontation with a strangeness
that is invading a familiar environment, but also as the chaotic and
violent foundation of civilization.” (Ray 2017, 5. Our translation).
The orc half is seen as an invading stranger and a relic of a violent,
tribal and uncivilized past that is only barely hidden beneath a
somewhat human mask. Even if some are trying to be the more
“humanlike possible” other acts as a remembrance of a chaotic and
violent other by their actions or their belief they sometimes try to
hide. This confirms their essence as barbarian outsiders, with the
few exceptions having to fight their own tendency.
It is interesting to see that the half-orcs are absent from the
first player’s handbook of the fourth edition. At the same time, the
half-elves lose some of their outsider status, while they are more
prominently shown as charismatic leaders or ambassadors that
prefer large settlements to mingle with many people (Wizards of
the Coast, 2008, 42-43). They are adaptable and, as a relic of their
outsider status from the third edition, tend not to settle down for
long at one place (43). While it confirms their advantageous status,
it also changes their racial description as they are now:
(. . .) more than just a combination of two races –
the combination of human and elf blood produces
a unique race with qualities all its own. They share
some of the natural grace, athleticism, and keen per-
ceptiveness of elves, along with the passion and drive
of humans. But in their own right, they are charis-
matic, confident, and open-minded and are natural
diplomats, negotiators, and leaders. (Wizards of the
Coast, 2008, 43)
They aren’t just the best of their dual ancestry; they are a whole
new race with their own essential qualities that make them different
from the others. In the following edition, most half-human races
appear to be hybrids of their description from the third and fourth
ones. In fact, the language used for the half-elves descriptions is
less essential and tends to be more open about variability inside the
race. Only “some say” that half-elves are the best of their ancestry
and there are just “many” that are unable to fit into elven or human
society (Wizards of the Coast, 2014, 38). Even if some sentences still
tend to essentialize their characteristics, there is still a more notable
effort than in previous versions to show the description as tendency
rather than absolute. However, this isn’t the case for the half-orcs.
In fact, they are especially problematic as: “Some half-orcs rise to
become proud chiefs of orc tribes, their human blood giving themFDG’21, August 03–06, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada Antoine Premont and Samuel Heine
an edge over their full-blooded orc rivals. Some venture into the
world to prove their worth among humans and other more civilized
races.” (Wizards of the Coast, 2014, 40). Other than the evident
disdain for the orcs that was already present in the third edition,
we can focus on the fact that they are treated as an uncivilized race.
This can be linked to some of the colonial rationalism that was
created to support colonialism and civilizing mission. For example,
the notion of uncivilized, primitive and barbarous peoples, laws
or practices were used to justify the European colonization and
domination of territories like India and China while some effort was
made to impose a more “civilized” way to the colonized population
(Mann, 2004, 4-9 ; Cooper, 2019,171-178).
The notion of civilized will almost always include a hierarchical
superiority of a culture over an uncivilized other. May it be the
notion of “primitive” Native American or of “decadent civilization”,
it is used to rationalize the domination of another power or its
right to conquer them. In the case of the half-orcs, we can even say
that they are essentially doomed to act harshly and in uncivilized
way as the influence of the god Gruumsh causes some to “hear
the whispers of Gruumsh in their dreams, calling them to unleash
the rage that simmers within them. [ . . .] Half-orcs are not evil by
nature, but evil does lurk within them, whether they embrace it
or rebel against it.” (Wizards of the Coast, 2014, 40-41). Those two
statements are somewhat unable to be true at the same time. If evil
lurks beneath them, their essence is at least partly evil by definition
even more than the tieflings who, despite their infernal bloodline,
are unaffected by their lineage and more by the prejudices they live
through (Wizards of the Coast, 2014, 42-43).
This situation makes it so that the half-elves are less essentialized
and more determined than the half-orcs. The half-elves have a set
of history, appearance and statistics that make them more prone to
act in certain ways, while the half-orcs have an essential rage and
uncivilized tendency where they need to fight their own nature to
integrate themselves in civilized society. They are not as adaptable
as the half-elves or entirely determined by how people see them.
They are essentially as they are and can only change by fighting
their own being.
5 CONCLUSION
Through the course of this article, we have explored the various
ways in which races were represented in D&D. We have seen that
this construction is mostly human centric. They go from being the
“base” race that serve as the unit of comparison to being a versatile
imperialist standing as “first among equals”. They are the only ones
that can do everything while still being able to be specialized. They
transcend the unchanging essence inherent to the concept of race
(especially in early editions) reaffirming their dominant status. They
are civilized and accepting, making them the “natural” leaders of
D&D.
On another note, we have seen that demi-humans are very pe-
culiar. Half-elves change from in-between two worlds to being
a race of leaders, ambassadors and social butterflies. Meanwhile,
the half-orcs are another subject entirely. They represent a more
humanized monster as if their half-human part was their only re-
deeming feature, giving them more intelligence and strength. The
more human-like they are (both physically and culturally), the lessbarbarous and evil they become, while still being prisoners from
their corrupted orcish heritage. They aren’t just fighting against
how others treat them; they need to constantly resist their own
violent and barbaric nature, kept in check by their human heritage.
Through the various editions of D&D, we have noticed a lessened
impact of essentialism in how the game systems represented races.
From 3rd edition onward, races were more described as determinis-
tic, as their inherent traits made them more suited in certain areas
of expertise, although there was no obligation to commit to such
areas. This, however, is not the case of the game settings, where
races have had similar depictions through various editions. They
are linked to a set of physical, mental and cultural characteristics
that are seen as the norm. While adventurers can escape this fate,
they do so at the risk of becoming an outsider and an exception to
their racial identity.
The recent publication of Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything (Wiz-
ards of the Coast, 2020) could have been a step in the right direction.
While it provided alternative rules for races, they are shown as an
optional set of rules that let the players exchange the abilities of
their chosen race for others. In fact, this option doesn’t replace
the base description of each race. As such, the rules still provide
an essentialist perspective on race. Moreover, those rules failed
to account for the ways in which races are described in the game
setting as a mostly unified whole. While the opening statement of
our article by Wizards of the Coast lead us to believe in a stronger
social position in regards to race, Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything
simply “add choice to your character’s race” (Wizards of the Coast,
2020, 7). While it is a step in the right direction, it is lackluster,
especially since they added the concept of “custom lineage” that let
players create their own lineage/race by choosing between a limited
numbers of options (8). By reframing this system, expanding on it,
focusing more on the character’s life experiences and profession
(in a similar way to the background feature11of the 5thedition),
they could easily make big steps forward to escape some of the
essentialism that links statistics to race.
Evidently, the question of race in D&D isn’t an easily fixable issue,
especially since the historical and cultural characteristics of races
are deeply ingrained in the generic conventions and diegesis of
D&D. After all, the origin of D&D as an adaptation of fantasy
fiction means that it also integrated the generic conventions that
made “race the conventional framework around which difference
is built in the genre, it shapes worlds, societies, peoples, cultures,
and conflicts” (Young, 2015, 35). Even if players can (and are invited
to) modify the rules, there is still a need for a more official solution.
Fantasy races could be an excellent tool to discuss of diversity.
However, there is a need to escape the colonial origin of fantasy
to have a more contemporary comprehension of racial discourses
that a simple two pages option in an optional book can’t add by
itself. Nonetheless, even with the publication of Tasha’s Cauldron of
Everything , it is still too early to tell how D&D will change on this
aspect. As an industry leader and trend-setter, D&D and Wizards of
the Coast have considerable influence on the tabletop role-playing
11The fifth edition of Dungeons & Dragons added a new step during character creation
(Background). This step lets players choose a past for their characters (Wizards of
the Coast, 2014, 125) which in turn affects some of the skills, abilities and items they
possess, based on their life experiences.The Human Fantasy FDG’21, August 03–06, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada
game industry. The ripple effects of those initial first steps are yet
to be determined and should be monitored closely.
D&D, however, does not account for the whole roleplaying in-
dustry. It should also be noted that considerable attention should be
given to player-created content and other publishers, games and/or
universes to see if they diverge from what we have seen thus far.
Further studies on a larger corpus of books should be considered,
with regards to other publishing companies including independent
publications. This could let us see a broader picture of the situation
as we would be able to understand how many game systems use
the concept of races, how they use it and if some of them are able
to escape the early codes of the fantasy genre.
REFERENCES
Appelcline, Shannon. 2014. Designers & Dragons: a History of the Roleplaying Game
Industry ’70-’79 . Colesville: Evil Hat Productions.
Bank, Andrew. 1996. «Of “Native Skulls” and “Noble Caucasians”: Phrenology in
Colonial South Africa ». Journal of Southern African Studies 22 (3): 387-403.
Cooper, Tamara. 2019. «Missionaries and Chinese Women. The Representation and
Exploitation of Vulnerabilities in British Missionary Writting ». In Colonialism,
China and the Chinese: Amidst Empires , edited by Matthew P. Fitzpatrick et Peter
Monteath, 171-83. New York: Routledge.
Cover, Jennifer. 2010. The Creation of Narrative in Tabletop Role-Playing Games . London:
McFarland.
Higgin, Tanner. 2009. «Blackless Fantasy: The Disappearance of Race in Massively
Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games ». Games and Culture 4 (1): 3-26.
Juul, Jesper. 2005. Half-Real: Video Games between Real Rules and Fictional Worlds . MIT
Press.
Kivisto, Peter and Croll, Paul R. 2012. Race and Ethnicity: The Basics . London: Routledge.
Mackay, Daniel. 2001. The Fantasy Role-playing Game: A New Performative Art . Jefferson
: McFarland.
Mann, Michael. 2004. «“Torchbearers Upon the Path of Progress”: Britain’s Ideology
of a “Moral and Material Progress” in India ». In Colonialism as Civilizing Mission:
Cultural Ideology in British India , edited by Harald Fischer-Tiné et Michael Mann,1-28. London: Anthem Press.
Monson, Melissa J. 2012. «Race-based fantasy realm: Essentialism in the world of
warcraft ». Games and Culture 7 (1): 48-71.
Mukherjee, Souvik. 2017. Videogames and Postcolonialism: Empire Plays Back . Gewerbe-
strasse: Palgrave Macmilla
Peterson, Jon. 2012. Playing at the World: a History of Simulating Wars, People and
Fantastic Adventures from Chess to Role-Playing Games . San Diego: Unreason Press.
Salen, Katie and Zimmerman, Eric. 2004. Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals .
MIT Press.
Spencer, Steve. 2014. Race and Ethnicity: Culture, Identity and Representation . Hoboken:
Taylor and Francis.
Tactical Studies Rules. 1974. Dungeons & Dragons: Rules for Fantastic Medieval
Wargames Campaigns Playable with Paper and Pencil and Miniature Figures . Lake
Geneva.
Tactical Studies Rules. 1978. Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Player’s Handbook: Com-
piled Information for Players and Dungeon Masters . Lake Geneva.
Tactical Studies Rules. 1989. Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2ndEdition Player’s Hand-
book. Lake Geneva.
Trammell, Aaron. 2018. «Representation and Discrimination in Role-Playing Games ».
InRole-Playing Game Studies: Transmedia Foundations , edited by Sebastian Deterd-
ing and José P. Zagal, 440-47. New York: Routledge.
Tresca, Michael. 2011. The Evolution of Fantasy Role-Playing Games . London: McFarland.
Tsu, Timothy Yun Hui. 2011. Black market, Chinatown, and Kabukicho: Postwar Japanese
Constructs of “Overseas Chinese” . positions: east asia cultures critique, 19, no 1: 133
58.
Young, Helen. 2015 . Race and Popular Fantasy Literature: Habits of Whiteness . Routledge.
Wainwright, A. Martin. 2019. Virtual History: How Videogames Portray the Past . New
York: Routledge.
Wizards of the Coast. 2000. Dungeons & Dragons Player’s Handbook Core Rulebook I .
Renton.
Wizards of the Coast. 2008. Dungeons & Dragons Player’s Handbook Arcane, Divine
and Martial Heroes. Renton.
Wizards of the Coast. 2014. Dungeons & Dragons Player’s Handbook . Renton.
Wizards of the Coast. 2020. Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything . Renton.
Wizards of the Coast. 2020. «Diversity and Dungeons & Dragons ». Dungeons & Drag-
ons. Website consulted November 19th. https://dnd.wizards.com/articles/features/
diversity-and-dnd
Zagal, José and Deterding, Sebastian. 2018. «Definitions of “Role-Playing Games”
»inRole-Playing Game Studies: a Transmedia approach , edited by José Zagal and
Sebastian Deterding. 19-51. New York: Routledge.