DIGITAL SIGNATURES: 
CAN THEY BE ACCEPTED AS LEGAL SIGNATURES IN EDI? 
202 Patrick W. Brown 
The MITRE Corporation 
Burlington Road, M/S A155 
Bedford, MA 01730-1420 
617-271-3717 
pwb@mbunix.mitre.org 
ABSTRACT* 
Digital Signature (DS) technology may be employed to produce legally enforceable signatures in Electronic Data 
Interchange (EDI) among computer users within the same general guidelines and requirements as those developed 
for handwritten signatures on paper. Digital signature technology promises assurance at least equal to written 
signatures. From a legal standpoint, this assurance remains to be tested in the evidentiary process. Business 
policies for organizational use of this technology are being created as the use of digital signature technology is 
adopted. Standard industry practice serves to create and document a legal precedent. Digital signatures are 
especially applicable to interpretations of contracts and statute of fraud law. Digital signatures may be used to 
provide assurances in distributed and networked computer environments where electronic transactions require a 
high degree of trust. 
Keywords: Digital Signatures, Law, EDI, Distributed Systems, Cryptography, Networks 
INTRODUCTION: 
Computer technology has evolved at a rate that has 
challenged society's ability to deal with the issues it has 
raised. Newly networked and distributed computer systems 
place computer resources that were once physically remote 
and difficult to access at the disposal of many potential 
users. This increases information availability but also has 
associated risks. The law is "beginning to recognize that 
its classical concepts and rules literally cannot 'do justice' 
with regard to much actual and potential computer-related 
litigation" (Gemignani, page ix). 
Digital Signatures (DS) are a recent technological concept 
(based upon cryptography) that are on the verge of 
widespread usage in Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) in a 
distributed system environment, but their legal standing has 
not been significantly tested. This paper will discuss 
whether digital signatures in EDI could legally replace 
handwritten signatures on paper and explore some of the 
associated legal, technological, and policy issues. 
Computers have come into widespread use for a great 
number of information manipulation, transfer, and storage 
uses. Their advantage lies in being able to quickly process 
large amounts of electronic-based information rather than 
the slower processing of information in a physical form 
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is 
granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for 
direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the 
title of the publication and its data appear, end notice is given 
that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing 
Machinery, To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee 
and/or specific permission. 
1st Conf.- Computer & Comm. Security '93-11/93 -VA,USA 
© 1993 ACM 0-89791-629-819310011 ...$1.50 (e.g., on paper). Computers are no longer simply stand- 
alone machines that process information; they are 
interconnected so they may share information and computer 
resources with users over a widespread geographic area. We 
are moving away from a purely paper-based society to one 
that is electronic-based to handle a larger number of 
communication transactions at a much faster and more 
efficient pace. The result has been a communication and 
information explosion; more information is available much 
more quickly. The electronics based communications 
revolution is growing at an exponential rate. Electronic- 
based messages (including fax, electronic mail, and 
videotex) are taking the place of paper-based 
communications and installing a "new order" in everyday 
life and commerce. Taken as a whole, we will refer to this 
computer based information exchange process generically as 
EDI; simply put this means the exchange of electronic 
messages between "users." Users can mean both people 
and the machines themselves as both message senders and 
message recipients. Information may remain in electronic 
form and never be printed. "The lack of hardcopy records 
and manual signatures creates new risks that must be 
carefully considered in any EDI implementation" (CSL 
BULLETIN, page 3). Individuals and organizations will act 
* This paper was written in the MIT Technology and 
Policy Program and was sponsored by The MITRE 
Corporation. The views expressed are solely those of the 
author and do not reflect an official point of view of MIT or 
of The MITRE Corporation. 
86upon information included in EDI transactions and use it to 
perform legal transactions, such as making contracts, filing 
tax returns, and regulatory reports, etc. They may also use 
the medium for illicit purposes (which may be considered 
,akin to mail fraud or trespassing - topics for another day). 
EDI users assume the messages exchanged may be trusted 
in that the person's name attached to the electronic 
transaction is the actual sender and the message received is 
that which was sent. Note that these are two separate 
assumptions. Without controls, electronic information 
may be easily altered with very little effort by the sender, 
the receiver, or someone in between. This is very pertinent 
to contracts ,and the statute of frauds since the electronic 
medium is so malleable. Specific activities must be 
undertaken to assure that EDI messages are authentic, 
accurately communicated, and retMnable. (CSL, page 3) In 
a paper-based society, these assu~mces ,are so commonplace 
they are often taken for granted; a handwritten signature is 
used to show acceptance/ownership of what is written on 
the piece(s) of paper to which it is attached. A physical 
copy of the item is retained on file. For more important 
transactions, more assurance is required: a notary witnesses 
signatures for some documents, while a member of a 
commercial bank or stock exchange is required to witness 
and authenticate a stock redemption signature, etc. The 
more important the transaction, the more stringent the 
requirements for signature authentication. In EDI, like 
elsewhere, certain types of messages are inherently more 
sensitive than others. For example, a contract offer is more 
sensitive than a notice of a meeting of the local computer 
society. One requires more integrity ,and assurance. One 
will be retained, the other discarded. In the paper-based 
world, signatures provide a degree of assurance for the more 
important messages. How can the handwritten signature 
concept be translated into the new electronic medium? 
Cryptologic techniques (such as "digital signatures") may 
be employed to obtmn similar assurances in an electronic 
form. Adopting a Digital Signature Standard (DSS) is a 
public policy alternative that is being devised at the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) so 
asstmmces may be created and promoted. 
SIGNATURES: 
Handwritten signatures are a symbol predicated upon paper- 
based transactions. They serve to bind the signer to what is 
printed/written on the paper to which it is attached. Black's 
law diction,try defines "sign" and "signature" ,as follows: 
Sign: 
To ~fffix one's name to a writing or instrument for 
the purpose of authenticating or executing it, or to 
give it effect as one's act. To attach a name or 
cause it to be attached to a writing by any of the 
known methods of impressing a n,'une on paper. 
To affix a signature to: ratify by hand or se,al; to 
subscribe in ones own handwriting. To make any 
mark, as upon a document, in token of knowledge, 
approved, acceptance, or obligation. Signature: 
The act of putting one's name at the end of an 
instrument to attest its v,'didity; the name thus 
written. A signature may be written by hand, 
printed, stamped, typewritten, engraved, 
photographed, or cut from one instrument and 
attached to another...; it being immaterial with 
what kind of instrument a signature is made 
(Black, page 1239). 
The signer is authenticating and showing agreement with 
the document (the legal message) as a whole. As noted in 
the definition, a signature does not need to be a handwritten 
signature at ,all; it can be any symbol adopted by the signer. 
The individual (an agent) may choose any mark or symbol 
to employ as a representative of himself (see Ames v. 
Schurmeire, 9 Minn. 221 [Gil. 206] (1864)). This is why 
an illiterate may use an "X" as his signature and it is 
accepted legally. An autograph is just a popular, but not 
an exclusive, method of indicating message approval. For 
example, in Hillstrom v. Gosnay (188 Mont. 388, 614 
P.2d 466 (1980)), a typewritten name on a telegram was 
held to be a satisfactory method of indicating approval 
(Wright, page 278). 
The legal implications of a signature depend upon the kind 
of document one is signing and the circumstances that 
surround its acceptance. By itself, a signature does not 
really have much meaning. It only has meaning when it is 
attached to the document and its content in a context. 
As an example, let's examine authentication in the case of a 
classic paper document, a purchase order. By convention, 
the initiator (an agent acting on behalf of himself or an 
organization) physically types information including 
his/her identity on a form or printed letter head, inks ,an 
autograph, staples the pages, makes a copy, and delivers the 
paper via an intermediary such as the postal service to the 
recipient. The convention m~kes clear the person is acting 
as an agent to bind. Trade contracts ,are covered under the 
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C., which is accepted in 
all states except Louisiana) and under the statute of frauds. 
Using these rules, the courts have recognized initials, 
marks, typewritten n,'unes, and stamps as proof of assent. 
Pen and ink are not necessary. Pencil, carbon copy, or 
photographic signatures are acceptable. The essence of a 
signature is intent to use it (whatever "it" happens to be) to 
adopt or approve a writing. Under U.C.C. &1-201(39), for 
example, "signed" includes any symbol executed or adopted 
by a party with present intention to authenticate a writing. 
The U.C.C. &1-201(39) Official Comment explains: 
The inclusion of authentication in the definition of 
"signed" is to make clear that as the term is used in 
[the U.C.C.], a complete signature is not necessary. 
Authentication may be printed, stamped, or written; it 
may be by initials or a thumbprint. It may be on any 
part of the document... (Wright, page 282). 
87Also, the signer must have the authority ,and the capacity to 
sign. The intent to sign or authenticate must be clear. If 
one is not properly authorized to act as an agent, one 
cannot exercise this authority. The agent must be 
authorized to enter into a binding contract for himself or the 
organization he represents. This is especially true in 
contracting with the Government; all parties must be 
authorized agents to have a valid contract. If a signature is 
made "without actual, implied, or apparent authority" 
(according to the U.C.C.), it is unauthorized. 
The statute of frauds illustrates many of the functions and 
justifications for writing and signing requirements. The 
statute of frauds generally holds that contracts must be in 
writing and signed. "Writing is a ritual that makes the 
transaction binding ,and cautions the actors that they are 
entering into a solemn matter" (Wright, page 280). Like 
the writing of the message itself, signing is associated with 
seriousness ~md deliberation. Conventional wisdom views 
a signature as proof (or forensic evidence) of a writing's 
authenticity ,and proof of the originator's assent to it, but 
the proof is not airtight with handwritten signatures. 
Authorities have tended to be very liberal in determining 
what constitutes a valid signature; irregularities in form are 
difficult to prove and tend to be disregarded. In a dispute, 
each side consults his own expert document examiners to 
support his position on a documents authenticity. The 
circumstances surrounding the ,assent (the parties' authority 
and capacity, etc.) tend to be more important. 
Some statutes (e.g., statute of frauds) speak of the message 
being "subscribed." Courts have sometimes interpreted this 
to mean the signature must appear at the foot of the writing 
for all of it to be binding (Wright, page 283). (See' R.C. 
Durr Co., Inc., v. Bennett Indus., Inc., 590 S.W.2d 338 
(Ky. App 1979) versus the signature appearing anywhere 
on the item as described in Black's definition.) This narrow 
interpretation by the court seems to be following the letter 
rather than the spirit of the law. 
DIGITAL SIGNATURES: 
Digital signatures may be used to assure message integrity, 
(i.e., it is the message that was sent); originator 
authentication, (i.e., the person who "signed" the message 
sent the message). Cryptography may also be used to 
assure message confidentiality (i.e., to insure the message 
is only available to the sender and receiver). 
Digital signatures are a specialized application of crypto- 
graphic technology to ,assure the origin of the message and 
the identity of the sender. The digital signature is "unforge- 
able and c~m potentially be used as a valid signature in legal 
contracts" (Russell, page 190). A number of cryptographic 
schemes have been developed to provide originator 
authentication (often in combination with other assurances, 
some of which m'e noted above). A digital signature is a 
string of bits. It is appended to the end of the message. 
Depending upon the importance of the message, the 
message itself may be encrypted. How much encryption is 
needed is ~m important issue since there is "overhead" asso- ciated with performing encryption: more time (wall clock 
,and CPU time) is expended in performing the hashing and 
encryption/decryption operations. Also, a potentially larger 
encrypted message now needs to be sent over the communi- 
cation channel (which can be costly when considering a 
large volume of message traffic). Often the message body 
itself may be run through a simpler "hash" algorithm to 
create a smaller, more manageable message digest. NIST 
has published a Secure Hash Standard (SHS). The hash 
algorithm is not the most cryptographically robust 
(everyone uses the same hash scheme under this scenario), 
but the message is once removed from its clear text state. 
An algorithm suitable for this purpose has the property that 
it is "computationally infeasible" to find the same hash 
value. All practical systems involve signing of the hash of 
the message versus signing the message directly. 
Digital signatures ,are based upon the Public Key 
Encryption (PKE) system first proposed by Diffe and 
Hellman in 1976. It involves two asymmetric 
cryptographic keys: one public key, which is maintained 
in a public key repository open to ,all who ask for it, ,and 
one private key which the owner maintains and is his 
unique identity (CSL Bulletin, page 5). These two keys are 
separate ,and distinct. Many schemes have been developed 
based upon the public key precepts; each has its advantages 
,and disadvantages. The RSA encryption scheme developed 
by Rivest, Shamir, ,and Adleman (RSA, nmned for the 
initials of the inventors) at MIT in 1978 is considered very 
robust. The RSA keys (approximately 300 digits or so) are 
generated mathematically by multiplying large prime 
numbers (each approximately 150 digits long). The 
security rests on the difficulty of factoring such a large 
number into its component primes. It is unlikely that 
those wishing to break this system will choose number 
cracking as a cost-effective way to circumvent digital 
signatures; no one has yet compromised this system. The 
RSA inventors licensed the algorithm and formed a 
company offering ,an RSA based system as a commercial 
cryptographic product. This product and the RSA 
algorithm have become a de facto industry standard for 
digital signatures currently in use by such companies as 
Lotus Corp., (in its Notes groupware product) and Apple, 
(included in System 7 operating system enhancements). 
Alteration of an encrypted message will result in garbled 
plain text. Changes to the message plain text, whether the 
result of tampering with the encrypted form or the original 
message, will result in a change to the hash value; this will 
cause the signature check to fail. Here is an example of a 
possible implementation involving encryption and a digital 
signature: 
User 1 calculates the hash of the message. 
User 1 generates a random encryption key for a 
conventional cryptosystem ~md encrypts the message. 
User 1 signs the hash code with his private key for 
authentication. 
88User 1 encrypts the random encryption key with User 
2's public key (for privacy between sender and 
receiver). 
User 1 sends the encrypted message, signature of the 
hash code, ,and encrypted random key to User 2. 
User 2 receives these items. 
User 2 decrypts the encrypted random key and uses it to 
recover the message. 
User 2 calculates the hash and verifies that the 
signature matches the message 
(Adapted from Russell, page 190). 
The main drawback to this system lies in the fact that keys 
need to be very carefully managed. Public keys must be 
distributed in a secure and readily available manner, and 
private keys must be kept secret in that only the owner has 
access to them. If public key availability is disturbed or 
private keys are lost/stolen, the system is no longer secure 
and signature authentication is no longer assured. Public 
key certificates and certification authorities (e.g., U.S. 
Government, Internet, U.S. Postal Service) have been 
proposed to address some of the issues involved in key 
management and user verification. 
Digital signatures differ from handwritten signatures in two 
important ways: 
. No matter how complicated a written signature is, 
a forger intent on committing fraud will 
eventually be able to duplicate it, while "a digital 
signature .... should by definition be inimitable." 
. A person's handwritten signature should be a 
constant in the sense that it is "the same" for ,all 
documents signed by that person, but digital 
signatures ,are by design different for every 
message (Akl, page 15). 
These are fundamental differences. Handwritten signatures 
are by assumption always "the same" while digital 
signatures appear different but can always be "reduced" to a 
mathematicai certainty to be the same. Digital signatures 
can be measured, while handwritten signatures ,are more 
amorphous. 
A digital signature is a "message-dependent quantity that 
c,an only be computed by the sender on the basis of some 
private information" (Akl, page 15), his private 
cryptographic key. 
LEGAL SIGNATURES AND THEIR ELECTRONIC 
FORM: 
There is difficulty in applying writing and signing 
requirements to electronic transactions since these 
transactions are not paper-based. It is impossible to dr;fit practical legal rules that are absolutely unambiguous for all 
occasions. Rigid legal rules do not take technologicai 
change, elastic meanings, or specific situations into 
account (Wright, page 277). New technology and specific 
situations are continually ,altering the interpretation of the 
statutes, so we must interpret what has come before in 
applying this new technology concept. 
As stated earlier, ,any symbol may be adopted to indicate the 
acceptance/approval embodied in a signature. 
A signature's traceability to the signatory [is] very 
important. Paper-based signatures inherently include 
forensic traits such as unique pen stroke, ink, or paper 
which help identify the signatory. In the absence of 
paper documents, methods to authenticate EDI 
transactions (for example, introducing forensic refits to 
help identify the parties and message content) must be 
used to ensure trustworthiness and degree of legally 
probative evidence comparable to that provided by 
conventional signature (Baum, page 1). 
In EDI, a Message Authentication Code (MAC) may be 
used for this purpose. They embody ,all of the attributes of 
a valid acceptable signature~ they ,are unique, verifiable and 
"under the [certifiers] sole control such that one may 
presume from its use that the certifying official, just ,as if 
he had written his name in his own hand intended to be 
bound" (Armstrong, page 3). One may view digital 
signatures as a highly secure and specialized authentication 
code based upon ,an asymmetric cryptosystem. The digital 
signature identifies the individual and acts as a symbol of 
their approval. The courts have previously recognized an 
array of symbols for this purpose; this is simply one more 
symbol an individual may adopt that is now available with 
new technology. This conclusion is not based on the 
degree of security or forensic reliability provided by the 
symbol. The main concern is for prevention of deceit. 
Without controls, the EDI message receiver can easily ,alter 
the text attached to a signature or the signature itself. EDI 
is a more fluid medium than the previous, more rigid 
technologies employed. 
EDI items may be examined in human readable form (e.g., 
on a computer monitor) ,and stored in human readable form. 
On the whole, EDI integrity is better than ,an audio tape 
recording and at least equ,al to that of a paper and ink 
contract. "Just as with paper and ink, EDI technology 
provides a recitation of the precise terms of the contract and 
avoids the risk of error inherent in oral testimony which is 
based on human memory" (Armstrong, pages 5-6). 
Cryptography in general and digital signature technology 
specifically provide a degree of ,assurance about the security 
of the document ,and of the sender. 
Any requirement tor a signature or its equivalent should be 
critically scrutinized. Handwritten signatures protect 
message senders to a limited degree but do not protect 
message recipients much at ,all. With or without a signing 
requirement, the burden would still be upon the recipient to 
89show the senders intent to adopt the message. Fulfillment 
of this burden usually must rely on the facts and 
circumstances surrounding the message (Wright, page 
307). 
Evidence of message origin and contents is crucial. 
Authentication in a paper transaction rests with document 
examiners. In EDI, this may translate into providing 
assurance evidence of message origin (the sender) and 
contents (the message) (Wright, page 64 ). Electronic 
messaging may interrupt the usual writing and signing 
concept conventions in a number of respects. Electronic 
signatures ,are not handwritten autographs. They may have 
a degree of assurance through cryptographic and procedural 
methods (key management, public key certificates, 
certificate authorities, etc.) that the sender did in fact send 
the electronic message. These same techniques applied to 
the entire message can assure that this document received 
was the one sent ,and can assure confidentiality between the 
two parties. Contracts it are no different than the normal 
signature process. All of the elements to have a valid 
signature must be present (capacity, etc.); only the delivery 
method is different. With digital signatures there is an 
added degree of assurance. Even if a message is intercepted, 
it cannot be easily decrypted or altered, and re-sent with this 
digital signature. Like szffety seals on food and medicines, 
these are not foolproof assurance methods, but they will 
require the individual to go to great lengths to try to "beat 
the system." Like broken physical seals, there will be tell- 
tale signs that indicate the message is not to be trusted. 
Few courts have considered how agents act through 
computers (Wright, page 254). Electronic messages may 
also be automatically generated (e.g., an electronic stock 
trade based upon a data trigger - a stock price change) 
without human intervention. No human (or no particular 
individual) may be in the loop. This may have many legal 
implications. In SUtte Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance 
Co. v. Brockhorst (453 F.2d 533 (10th Cir. 1972)), an 
agent was acting through a computer; the insurance 
company computer incorrectly sent out an insurance 
renewal notice. The company argued an "unimaginative" 
computer could not bind the company. The court held the 
company liable, reasoning a computer does what you tell it 
to, so the company was responsible for the actions of its 
computer. In this case, there was no signature, but one 
was implied by the fact the company's computer system 
created a legal document and sent it out using customary 
channels. Again, the generic signature requirements apply 
(even in their absence); only the technology that provides 
the message is different. 
Other electronic cases furnish compelling support for the 
proposition that a durably recorded electronic message, 
bearing a code or symbol intended as a signature, is written 
and signed. No reported lawsuit has examined whether a 
purely electronic message satisfies the statute of frauds 
(Wright, page 289). Even though there has not been a 
specific case on the legally of digital signatures, it fits with 
precedent that these signature methods would be an acceptable symbol of assent. It is simply the 
method/symbol selected to show acceptance. 
As noted earlier, the ,assurances offered by digital signature 
technology are especially applicable to business 
transactions (contracts ,and the like between people and 
institutions). Many statutes, regulations, contracts, and 
charters require legal notices or actions to be written and 
signed. Government filings are required to be signed: 
"Every pleading, motion, and other paper of a party 
represented by an attorney shall be signed .... " (Wright, 
page 277). Electronic filing saves the time and resources 
it takes to physically print out, sign, send data, and then 
reverse the process to get the information back into the 
receiver's electronic system. The user's symbol, his 
digital signature, could travel with the data to provide 
authentication with a large degree of assurance. The 
signature could also permanently reside with the data for 
record keeping purposes. The government has already 
begun this practice (usually without digital signature 
technology). For example, the IRS allows individuals and 
businesses to file their tax returns electronically. The 
government also makes payments and contracts using 
EDI. "In September of 1987, the first payment of U.S. 
government funds not requiring a written signature was 
disbursed" using an electronic certification system (a 
system developed by NIST based upon their commercial 
Digital Encryption System) (Computer Systems Security, 
page 10). 
The U.S. Comptroller General has given formal opinions 
(in June ,and December 1991) that federal agencies can use 
EDI technologies to create valid contractual obligations 
consistent with current statutory and case law. The use of 
an "electronic symbol" shows ,an intent to be bound and the 
message authentication code (read digital signature) can be 
used to perform this function (Armstrong, page 3). This 
was followed by a more formal decision in response to a 
NIST inquiry regarding the specific use of digital signatures 
by the government (see Office of the Comptroller General). 
While these two memos do not constitute a unified legal 
approach to digital signatures in government, let alone the 
private sector, the decisions embodied in them should 
contribute to the legal recognition of digital signatures 
(Baum, page 1). Also, the law notwithstanding the two 
parties could agree among themselves to choose any 
method of assent they choose; they could agree to the 
meaning and use of digital signatures for contracts. As the 
world's largest contractor and consumer, the government's 
lead will set a large degree a precedent and create de facto 
policy. 
As the law comes to recognize EDI as a positive (or 
inevitable) technological change, legal technicalities 
impeding its use will diminish. Policymakers seem to be 
proceeding cautiously, waiting for the courts to act on a 
case-by-case basis to clarify how the statues apply to 
electronic messages. The status quo is maintained until 
there is a specific need. In the meantime, this leaves EDI 
and digital signature users at some risk. Adoption of this 
90technology could be impeded where users perceive 
substantial risks; no one wants to be a test case. Risks for 
EDI users will diminish as the process develops, becomes 
better understood, and begins to form its own set of 
customs and practices. 
For the law, the court determines what is custom. This 
usually follows industry's using the new technology 
systems. Historically, judicial efforts have accommodated 
new technology within the existing laws (Wright, page 
306). To proactively avoid the ambiguity and delay these 
causes, there are a number of options. 
Industry could adopt its own standards ,and practices (i.e., to 
foster and develop trade customs that recognize electronic 
messages and digital signatures as legal entities (Wright, 
page 306)). The courts would strongly consider these 
standards in their judicial review. Also, the American Bar 
Association (ABA) has produced a Model EDI Trading 
Partner Agreement (published in The Business Lawyer, 
June 1990, known as the ABA Model) to aid in the creation 
of domestic EDI trading agreements and contracts (Wright 
page 238). The ABA MODEL &l.5 states that an 
electronic signature is "sufficient to verify" the origin of a 
proper message. Does it give more weight to an electronic 
signature than evidence law accords to conventional ink 
signatures? A signature itself is not sufficient to establish 
the origin of a paper document in court. Electronic 
evidence should be treated the same as paper messages under 
evidence authentication rules (Wright, pages 309-310). 
Considering the added assurances they provide, digital 
signatures may go much further in evidentiary matters. As 
DNA matching is being used as technological based 
evidence in some cases (within prescribed rules and limits), 
so to may digital signatures be used as evidence. It could 
be used to build towards a "preponderance" of evidence 
where required. 
Another option is to revise the statutes. Writing and 
signing requirements could be eliminated, or electronic 
transactions could be explicitly permitted. Elimination of 
writing and signing requirements would require the full 
facts of the case to be exiunined to ascertain whether a 
contract truly exists versus the outdated and unworkable 
proposition that the court needs a specified type of physical 
evidence (i.e., a signed writing). These rules were 
developed "to motivate the parties to obtain reliable 
forensic evidence before acting on it" and "to shield 
defendants from exposure to trial over unsubstantiated 
claims" (Wright, page 302). To throw out these prudent 
prescriptives seems like throwing out the baby with the 
bath water; these rules exist to make the process easier and 
more reasonable. Explicitly permitting and circumscribing 
EDI hits risks its technology evolves further but would also 
be an effort to (hopefully) foster the growth of technology. 
Legislation may "confound an already complex picture" 
(Newman, page 245). PUBLIC POLICY: 
Public policy on digital signature technology and its effects 
,are in the initial stages of being formed ,and refined. How 
will society deal with these technology-based issues in ,an 
equitable matter for the greater public good? Our society 
has gone through a similar policy-making process in the 
past with the introduction of the telegraph ,and telephone. 
These forms of communication also had implications in 
contracts and fraud. The telegraph produces a paper output 
that has a legal signature (the typed name of the sender) 
attached to it, when the other things needed to make a 
signature are present - see discussion above. Voice, over a 
telephone, is more fleeting but may be stored/recorded if 
special preparations are made to record it; but it may not be 
sufficient legal evidence in some cases (e.g., if recorded 
without the participant's knowledge, etc.) EDI is yet a new 
form of communication; it can be signed and stored in 
electronic form. Digital signatures and other cryptographic 
methods can be used to provide assurances of the message 
sender and the message content. Public policy does not 
have a direct relationship to the law but does factor into its 
interpretation by the courts. 
NIST is planning to publish a Federal Information 
Processing Standard (FIPS) publication on the selected 
federal Digital Signature Standard (DSS) based upon the 
E1 Gamal ,algorithm ,and the Schnorr algorithm. 
CONCLUSION: 
In conclusion, digital signatures unay be used as legal 
signatures within the same general guidelines and 
requirements as handwritten signatures on paper. They 
promise more assurance than a written signature; to the 
technologist the assurance is assumed with the 
understanding of the technical details of how digital 
signatures are designed and operate. From a legal 
standpoint, this assurance remains to be tested in the 
evidentiary process. 
Digital signatures seem especially applicable to 
interpretations of contracts ,and statute of fraud law. They 
may be used to provide assurances in distributed and 
networked environments where electronic transactions need 
to have a degree of trust associated with them. The federal 
government has already begun the acceptance process for 
this emerging technology; it has begun to issue policy- 
forming statements, is executing legal contacts using EDI, 
and has developed a DSS. As EDI transactions become 
more accepted and widespread, a corresponding number of 
legal suits and a resulting body of case law will be formed. 
Legislation may ,also be enacted to make the peculiarities of 
EDI legal authentication clearer (as they ,are uncovered with 
use). The development of digital signature standards and 
practices will serve the public by fostering an environment 
where EDI can flourish ,and come to its true potential as a 
communications unedium. "The main value [of digital 
signatures] comes in computer transactions, where [they] 
91can be used to sign transactions and thus authenticate the 
originator, even when the two parties involved have never 
before interacted" (Neugent, page 33). EDI will not take 
the place of paper communication with written signatures; 
it will supplement it ,and perhaps even someday surpass its 
usage. Legally recognized digital signatures can expedite 
this process ,and may provide an extra/improved level of 
assurance. 
REFERENCES 
. Akl, Selim G., February 1983., "Digital 
Signatures: A Tutorial Survey," COMPUTER, 
pages 15-24. 
. Armstrong, T. H., 19 June 1991, "Electronic 
Contracting," Memorandum, Office of the Assistant 
General Counsel to the Controller General, pages 1- 
6. 
3. Baum, M. S., January 1992, "Legal Standing of 
Digital Signatures," electronic mail, pages 1-2. 
4. Black, H. C., 1979, Black's Law Dictionary, 5th 
edition, St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Company. 
5. National Research Council, 1991, Computers at 
Risk, Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 
. 
7. National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
(NIST) September 1989, Computer Systems 
Security, Gaithersburg, MD. 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
(NIST), June 1991, CSL Bulletin, 
Gaithersburg, MD. 
. Denning, D. E., February 1993, "Protecting Public 
Keys and Digital Signatures," COMPUTER, 
pages 27-35. 
. Diffe, W. and M. E. Hellman, November 1976, 
"New Directions in Cryptography," IEEE 
Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. IT-22, 
No. 6, pages 644--654. 
10. El Gamal, T., " July 1985, A Public Key 
Cryptosum and a Signature Scheme Based on 
Discrete Algorithms," IEEE Transactions on 
Information Theory, Vol. IT-31, pages 469-472. 
11. Gemignani, Michael C., 1981, Law and the 
Computer, Boston, MA: CBI Publishing 
Company, Inc. 
12. National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST), 1 February 1993 (Draft), Proposed Digital 
Signature Standard (DSS), U.S. Department of 
Commerce, FIPS Publication. 13. National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST), January 1977 (Draft), Data Encryption 
Standard (DES), U.S. Department of Commerce, 
FIPS Publication 46-2. 
14. National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST), May 1993, Secure Hash Standard (SHS), 
U.S. Department of Commerce, FIPS Publication 
180. 
15. Neugent, B., February 1992, "Encryption: A Few 
Cryptic Remarks," IEEE SIG Security, Audit and 
Control Review, Vol. 10, No. 1, pages 29-36. 
16. Newman, J., 1985, "Contracts Made by Electronic 
Mail: Legal Issues, Technology, and Services," 
Ethical Issues in the Use of Computers, Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth Publishing Company, Inc., 
pages 237-246. 
17. Office of the Comptroller General, 13 December 
1991, "Matter of NIST-Use of EDI to Create Valid 
Obligations." 
18. Rivest, R. L., Adi Shmnir, and Leonard Adleman, 
February 1978, "A Method for Obtaining Digital 
Signatures and Public Key Cryptosystems," 
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 21, No. 2, 
pages 120-126. 
19. Russell, D., and G. T. Gangemi Sr., 1991, 
Computer Security Basics, Sebastopol, CA: 
O'Reilly & Associates, Inc. 
20. Schnorr, C. P., 1991, "Efficient Signature 
Generation for Smart Cards," Journal of 
Cryptography, Vol. 4, No. 3, pages 161-174. 
21. Wright, B., 1991, The Law of Electronic 
Commerce. EDI, Fax and E-mail: Technology, 
Proof and Liability, Boston, MA: Little, Brown 
,and Company. 
92