Gender gap in the STEM sector in pre and university studies of 
Europe associated with ethnic factors  
Sonia Verdugo -Castro  
 GRIAL Research Group,  
Research Institute for Educational 
Sciences, University of Salamanca  
37008, Salamanca, Spain  
 soniavercas @usal.es  M. Cruz Sánchez -Gómez  
 GRIAL Research Group,  
Research Institute for Educational 
Sciences, University of Salamanca  
37008, Salamanca, Spain  
mcsago@usal.es   Alicia García -Holgado  
 GRIAL Research Group,  
Research Institute for Educational 
Sciences, University of Salamanca 
37008, Salamanca, Spain  
aliciagh@usal.es
 
ABSTRACT  
The ground -breaking current project builds on the latent gender 
gap in the education sector in the areas of Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). The objective of the paper 
is to present the t hesis P roject, which addresses the study of the 
causality of this gap, associating the possible relationship with 
gender roles and stereotypes assumed, together with cultural 
factors, su ch as the origin of the person.  This paper describes the 
research project to study this situation and establish new 
ﬁeldwork, using a mixed methodology, taking into account the 
speciﬁc variables and dimensions.  In this ﬁeldwork, we want 
young people between the ages of 16 and 30 to t ell their story. 
From the evaluation of the current situation through the 
sequential mixed exploratory research method and from the 
longitudinal cohort to be carried out with the target population, 
palliative measures can be derived to reduce the gender ga p. The 
project will be carried out in three phases: preparation, research , 
and evaluation, each of which will be carried out using di ﬀerent 
techniques and instruments. The data collected will help to 
identify the relationship between the gender gap and et hnic and 
racial factors. Finally, it can be concluded that in order to generate 
and achieve equal representation, one must ﬁrst know the 
motivation and interests of people, which lead to di ﬀerent 
decisions being made and being able to work on them.  
CCS CONCEPTS  
• Social and professional topics → User characteristics ; 
Gender; Women • Social and professional topics → User 
characteristics ; Race and ethnicity • Social and professional 
topics → User characteristics ; Age; Adolescents  KEYWORDS  
Gender gap, ethnicity, gender roles, inclusive digital society . 
ACM Reference format:  
S. Verdugo -Castro, M. C. Sánchez -Gómez and A. García -Holgado.  2018 . 
Gender gap in the STEM sector in pre and university studies of Europe 
associated with ethnic factors . In Proceedings of the 6th International 
Conference on Technological Ecosystems for Enhancing Multiculturality 
(TEEM 2018) (Salamanca, Spain, October 24 -26, 2018), F. J.  García- Peñalvo 
Ed. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 7 pages . 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3284179.3284348 . 
1 INTRODUCTION   
Researching the gender gap and pursuing the implementation of 
measures to achieve gender equality is a necessity in the field of 
gender. In this way, the thesis Project aims to link the male 
representation in the STEM field with cultural patterns to 
subsequently propose the necessary action plan.  
It´s needed to look f or the origin of th e gender gap since it is a 
phenomenon due to a social construct and not something innate to the person. The professional vocation of the person is not 
determin ed by the sex of the individual but is conditioned by the 
social parameters that we build. Some o f these conditioning 
constructs are the roles, marked by the society and the culture of 
each place. We can support this idea in the lines of Rossi and 
Barajas [1]:  "Gender stereotypes and roles emerge in academic and 
professional decisions, usually unconsciously [2-3]. Gender 
stereotypes, understood as the beliefs that people have about what is 
proper and appropriate for each sex, are acquired in a process of socio -cultural learning through interactions with the closest models, 
such as the family and the sc hool [4-5], but also with the media [6]; 
that is, with the dominant or hegemonic discourse [7-8]".  
Furthermore, it should not be forgotten that the representation 
of women in the STEM sector has declined. As the situation diagnoses of the Universities rev eal, in many studies, women 
achieve higher rates of performance and success, graduating in less time than men, in spite of they are less represented in these 
studies, understood as masculinized. Thus, reference can be made 
to González- González, et al. [9] when they indicate that: "In the 
1980s, women represented a peak of between 35 and 40 percent of the computing and information technology (IT) workforce in the United States by 2011, that percentage dropped to about 25 percent, Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page.  Copyr ights for components of this work owned 
by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. 
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
 
TEEM '18, October 24–26, 2018,  Salamanca, Spain  
© 2018 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM . 
ACM  ISBN 978-1-4503- 6518- 5/18/10…$15.00  
http://dx.doi.org/10. 1145/ 3284179. 3284348Gender gap in the STEM sector in pre and university studies of 
Europe associated with ethnic factors  TEEM 2018, October 2018, Salamanca, Spain  
 
 985 according to National Center  for Women and Information 
Technology (NCWIT).  We can also cite as an example the Spanish 
university system, where according to the report published by the 
Ministry of Education [10], Culture and Sport, 54% of university 
students are women, In fact, in mos t of the degrees women are the 
majority, but if we focus on engineering and architectural studies, 
the number of women drops to a quarter of all the students, except for industrial design where there is a greater presence of women.  In 
this regard, women ca n be considered a minority within the context 
of STEM studies due to their lack of presence, not as minorities in society".  
Dele-Ajayi et al. [11], who point out that the same idea of 
under -representation of women also applies: " Another barrier to 
uptake i s an already low representation of females in the computer 
science and digital technologies field which reinforces the belief or perception among females that the careers within this field are not for 'people like me' and strengthens the view that the fiel d is 
generally associated with masculine stereotypes [12 -14]". Indeed, the 
fact that the idea of professions  both for women and men has been 
socially generated is detrimental to the development of balanced representation.  
In this field, visibility and, of course, motivation play a special 
role, as Pancratz and Diethelm [15] defend it: " In pursuance of 
motivating gir ls to get involved in CS and Engineering it is needed 
"to provide them with a possibility to express themselves, to communicate, to collaborate in teams, and to rebuild and model social phenomena [16]".  
The paper has been organized in the following way: th e first 
section is the introduction, followed by the second section which 
is state of the art. The third section sets out the hypothesis and the 
project's objectives. The fourth and fifth sections explain the 
methodology to be followed in the research , and finally , the sixth 
section concludes the paper.
 
2 STATE- OF-THE- ART 
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in the study of the gender gap. There have  been changes over the last decades 
concerning  the representation of women in STEM studies,  
changes caused by two phenomena: vertical segregation and horizontal segregation. The issue has grown in importance in light of recent results and data such as those presented below.  
First, studies show the low representation of women in studies 
and profe ssions that have been socially masculinized. Reference 
can be made to Strachan et al. [17] when they state that: "The 
situation in many countries in Europe and elsewhere are equally stark. In Japan, females represent about 2% of all engineers and in Canada , 13.7%. In India, about 32% earned degrees in engineering 
and technology but overall female participation in the workforce dropped from 37% in 2005 to 28% 2016. Across the European Union, the total percentage of females in high technology manufacturing and services roles is about 32%. In the UK, only 18% of engineering, 
technology and computer science undergraduates in 2015 -2016 were 
female and less than 10% of professional engineers were female in 2016 with a minor increase to 11% in 2017” . On the other hand, it is curious and striking that women are 
the most qualified in university studies and are also the least represented in the sector. This is not a problem that can be 
associated with a lack of interest in studies, but rather with social 
factors: "In S pain, according to the last report published by the 
Spanish Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports, Facts and figures of the Spanish Higher Education System - Academic year 2015 -2016, 
the 54,1% of the total university students are women. The proportion 
of women increases among university graduates to stand at 58% on 
average. The percentage of women participation in all fields of education is higher than men, with the exception of STEM careers. The highest percentage of women, 69.4%, is in the field of Health Sciences and the lowest, 25.8%, in Engineering and Architecture. 
These figures have remained stable over the last ten years if we 
compare the published results from the academic year 2005/2006”  
[18]. 
Also, some of the studies being carried out in the field of the 
gender gap include diagnoses of the situation of equal 
opportunities between men and women in university centres, mainly from the Equality Units (regulated in article 77 of Organic 
Law 3/2007, for effective equality between women and men [19]) .
 
Along with these diagnoses are the Equal Opportunity Plans for 
men and women, which arise to mitigate the glass wall and glass ceiling, among other issues, such as the promotion of equal 
representation.  
It is possible to indicate that, for the diagnosis of the year 2018 
of the University of Valladolid (Spain), correlative to the Equality 
Plan that will be in force until the year 2020, the data collected of the academic year 2 015/2016 show that 29% of the student body 
enrolled in degrees in the E ngineering and Architecture branch 
were women, and 71% of them  were  men [20]. And practically the 
other way around in the Health Sciences branch. This data responds to the phenomenon of the feminization of studies and 
horizontal segregation. Also, worthy o f mention is the data issued 
by the diagnosis of the University of Salamanca (Spain): in the 
academic year 2012/2013 women enrolled in the branch of knowledge of Engineering and Architecture only represented 25.63% [21].  
It is also surprising that, in addi tion to having a higher 
percentage of female graduates than male graduates and high rates of return and success, women represent a slightly higher scientific output than men. In this way in 2017, the study "Gender in the Global Research Landscape Report" p ublished by Elsevier 
[22] expresses: “The differences across genders are fairly limited; 
however, for most comparator countries and regions, women tend to have a slightly higher share of the top 10% of interdisciplinary 
scholarly output relative to their t otal scholarly output than men” .  
Authors from the Open University of Cataluña (Spain) like Ana 
María González and Monte Vall -llovera are also carrying out 
studies in the field, such as "Psychology and Educational Sciences 
Studies". Also noteworthy is the study "DIY: Towards feminist 
methodological practices in social research", by Biglia and Bonet 
[23], in Annual Review of Critical Psychology.
 Moreover, 
publications such as Soledad Murillo's help to understand the reality of which we spea k associated with gender roles.TEEM 20 18, October 2018, Salamanca, Spain S. Verdugo -Castro  et al.  
 
 
 986 In addition, it is important to note the work carries out by 
Paderewski et al. [24], which indicates the importance of " carrying 
out studies that highlight the main barriers or problems that prevent 
women from choosing a te chnical career, carrying out mentoring 
programmes, improving the visibility of references in the academic, 
business or labour world for women with technical training and carrying out courses, conferences or events to explain their role as engineers".  
Accor ding to Peixoto et al. [25] from within the framework of 
gender inequality and the problems that occur in the low percentage of women interested in studying careers related to STEM sector, it is inevitable that this will spread and reach the 
next link, whi ch is to reach working life. If there are few women 
interested in studying STEM, women will be underrepresented in 
the field of STEM in companies or as entrepreneurs in this sector.  
For this reason, initiat ives are currently under way at the national 
and i nternational levels to encourage greater representation of 
women in the sector. Initiatives are being implemented from the 
universities themselves as well as in larger and more socially 
inﬂuential companies. Some of the initiatives will be highlighted 
below. At the national level, studies have been carried out at the 
Higher Polytechnic School of the Carlos III University of Madrid 
(Spain), where a survey sought to identify the motivations of 
students. Studies were also carried out at the University of Ovie do 
(Spain) [26] from 2006 to 2010 to ﬁnd out the results and decisions 
of the students of t he university entrance exam, about the 
Scientiﬁc, Technological and Biosanitary High School. Some 
initiatives are also developed by the University of Lleida (Spain ), 
the University of Granada (Spain) and the University of La Laguna 
(Spai n). Internationally, we ﬁnd special clout in entities such as 
the Rochester Institute of Technology or the University of 
Michigan (EEUU). Also, there are also companies like IBM, Go ogle, 
CISCO or Public Administrations or the Media. For example, the 
Rochester Institute of Technology [27] is presently encouraging 
the participation of women in technical careers in the STEM 
sector, using innovative and creative ideas. Another proposal a t 
the University of Michigan [28], Women in Science and 
Engineering (WISE), encourages women from primary to 
postdoctoral levels.  
Other initiatives include IGNITE (Inspiring Girls Now In 
Technology Evolution) [29], the objectives of the Horizon 2020 Proposal, Technovation Challenge [30], ICT -Go-Girls! [31], 
FESTA (Female Empowerment in Science and Technology Academy) [32], the Genis -Lab project (The Gender in Science and 
Technology Lab) [33], the HELENA project (Higher Education Leading to Engineering and Scientific Careers) [34], the TWIST project (Towards Women in Science and Technologies) [35] or the 
WISAT project (Women in Global Science and Technologies) [36].  
However, this project is completely innovative, as it will be a 
study never performed before, with a very speci ﬁc methodology. 
Motivations will be linked to ethnic factors, something that has 
not been applied yet, focusing especially on the changes that occur 
between the ages of 16 and 30 in the most academic sense of the 
term.  
3 HYPOTHESIS AND RESEARCH OBJECTIVES  
In the thesis Project we start from the following working 
hypothesis: gender roles, stereotypes, cultural factors and origin factors that influence the decision of the students, in such a way that the real gender gap that  exists in STEM studies can be 
identified.  
The hypothesis is based on the existing and latent feminization 
at the different levels of studies (European Qualifications 
Framework for lifelong learning, the EQF -MEC model - which has 
8 levels), branches of kno wledge (Sciences, Health Sciences, 
Engineering and Architecture, Social and Legal Sciences, and Arts 
and Humanities) and specific degrees. Special consideration must be given to the cultural characteristics of the individual and the 
social conception in re lation to the masculinized and feminized 
professions in order to implement the Research Plan effectively 
and to be able to respond to the gender gap. Despite the fact that 
we are in the society of globalization, mainly in the political, 
economic and socio -cultural frameworks, the above hypothesis 
states that the culture of the individual, especially in the area of gender roles, can become highly conditioning for the gender gap.  
Based on the hypothesis formulated previously for the present 
thesis Project, th e general objectives of the thesis are the 
following:  
• To integrate the recipients, their motivations, preferences 
and intere sts in the research process.  
• To diagnose in the European educational framework the 
current situation in the STEM sector and its cau sality, in 
order to argue the decision making and possible action 
measures, such as establishing new channels of effective and 
real equality in the representation of both sexes in this 
framework.  
In order to achieve these objectives, a set of specific obje ctives 
have been defined, which are described below:  
• To establish contact networks with educational centres with 
different EQF- MEC levels, which can transfer their reality 
and with young studen ts with heterogeneous profiles. 
• To carry out fieldwork via the  research to assess the 
evolution of young people throughout the different stages of 
their studies, thus creating a longitudinal cohort study with 
the same students from high school to university education and evaluate the gender indicators in decision made that are 
produced in the formative stages of high school, vocational 
training and university, with an integral approach to gender 
mainstreaming.  
Moreover, it must not be forgotten that this will all be a long -
term objective: “To achieve equal opportuniti es in the labor market 
and the possibility of accessing competitive benefits within the ICT 
industry. Women themselves can profit from this career choice by earning higher salaries, enjoying  the higher flexibility to arrange 
their working schedules and being less susceptible to unemployment ”, 
González -González, et al. [37]  
For the collection of information, the Code of Ethics in 
Educational Research will be considered , since the informed 
consent of the participants will be required at all stages and they 
will be informed that all information collected will be used 
exclusively for research purposes. Ethical Guidelines for 
Educational Research [38] will be taken into account.Gender gap in the STEM sector in pre and university studies of 
Europe associated with ethnic factors  TEEM 2018, October 2018, Salamanca, Spain  
 
 987 4 METHODS 
Some of the i nitial research questions of the thesis Project that 
should be worked on include the following. These questions may 
change or evolve as research develops due to the mixed approach 
that will be used for the development of the doctoral thesis:  
• Do cultural an d source factors affect the choice of studies 
related to STEM areas?  
• Do gender roles and stereotypes influence decision making 
in higher education?  
Population and Sample:  The population will be students 
from educational centres of different EQF -MEC levels, within the 
regional, national and European environments.  The sample will 
be representative and random, according to the formula of Cea 
D'Ancona [39] for the quantitative study and will be 
representative at the level of speeches -signified (theoretic al 
sampling) for the qualitative study [40].  
Variables to be taken into account:  sex, influence of gender 
roles, ethnicity and nationality of the person, students from 
schools with an educational system similar to that of Spanish, 
people under 30 and over 16 years of age, individuals who are in 
high school, vocational training (intermediate and advanced level) 
and students from university education who are in the course of or have studied in the field of Engineering and Architecture, and Science.  
Exclusion criteria:
 Students from schools with an 
educational system different to Spanish, people over 30 or under 16 years old, people who are not in high school, professional 
training and students of university education who are not in 
course or have studied in th e field of Engineering and 
Architecture and Science.  
Methodology, method and techniques:  The thesis project 
is a methodologically mixed study, with a quantitative and 
qualitative part.  
Neither quantitative nor qualitative research is superior to its 
counte rpart and responds to the same inferential logic: both can 
be equally systematic and scientific [41] and can provide equally useful information. Moreover, if both types of data are integrated 
when they converge, there is a reinforcement of the external validity of generalizations.  
To achieve this, the mixed methodology is used, since the 
different integrated agents will need to be involved in the process.
 
And their observations, preferences and motivations cannot only be quantified, because a large part of the content is qualitative.
 It 
is important to highlight the comprehensive and interpretative deepening of the variables and dimensions studied and their 
specific and detailed analysis, because this generates an 
exhaustive qualitative analysis. Even though it is understood that 
not all information can be generalized, the use of qualitative methods should be pointed out, since they allow the analysis and interpretation of the meaning that people give to their decisions. 
In addition, this project focuses on active and participatory 
approach, since from the beginning to the end of the research 
process the di ﬀerent agents invited to participate will be 
integrated, working with instruments and tools that allow this and carry ing out a case study (longitudinal study) through the logical 
cohort that is established.  
The research method will be sequential mixed exploratory. The 
design is characterized by a first stage where quantitative data are collected and analysed, followed by another stage where 
qualitative data are collected and evaluated.  
The techniques used must be reliable and valid. The techniques 
for collecting information about cultural protective factors, inequality, gender stereotypes, discriminatory practices, socio -
educational processes, et c., will be collected and analys ed with 
documents, Likert scale questionnaires, life histories with case studies (longitudinal study), interviews, and discussion groups. One of the most outstanding techniques will be the focus grou p, 
which will allow us to know the opinions and feelings of the young participants in the process. In addition, a technique that 
will allow the approach to the students will be the Delphi method, 
which will be used in the contact phase with the centres. Th e 
techniques used to offer reliability and validity will be: exploratory and confirmatory factorial analysis for the questionnaire and the application of process guides and rubrics 
for the qualitative study.  
In relation to the quantitative design, an initi al questionnaire 
will be developed by students built ad hoc. It is obvious that the 
indispensable elements for this work are psycho -educational, 
educational and social. Finally, the psychometric model, as specified in the Figure 1 , shall be used fo r the development of the 
scales.  
 
Figure 1.  Psychometric model. Based on [42 -44]. 
The indicators for a constitutive definition of the construct and 
the theoretical relationships between them shall be specified. These indicators will be operationalised in items an d will be the 
initial elements of the instruments, which after the validation 
process, will be taken as measures of the construct.  
The quantitative data will be analysed, from descriptive and 
inferential techniques, with the application of the SPSS program ,TEEM 20 18, October 2018, Salamanca, Spain S. Verdugo -Castro  et al.  
 
 
 988 adjusting in all cases the types of analysis to the metric or non -
metric nature of the variables treated. In descriptive analyses, for 
example, specific relational techniques will be used, depending on 
the type of variables: contingency tables and correl ation indices fi, 
tau, and gamma, typical of nominal and ordinal variables; 
measures of central tendency, variability and Pearson correlation index, for the interval and/or ratio variables.  
For the qualitative design, focus groups will be created, also 
using information from other sources, already indicated. The 
NVIVO program will be used for this process.  
Regarding material resources: it will be necessary to have a 
technological support integrated by devices with advanced 
software and applications that all ow the establishment of 
communication channels, validated instruments to work with, 
SPSS and NVIVO programs and programs for statistical analysis 
and data dissemination.  
The systematic analysis of data will also be carried out thanks 
to the databases that the University of Salamanca makes available 
to students.  
In addition, as a measure to protect the environment: all the 
instruments used in the research will be put into use through 
technological supports to avoid the consumption of paper.  
5 DISSERTATION STATUS  
The following section of the paper is a scheme of the thesis 
Project’s procedure that is going to be explained in an in -depth 
way.  
The research with the methodology already indicated will be 
developed in three main blocks: preparation, research and 
evaluation.  Each of these blocks will have phases which  will 
define the moment of the analysis of the project.  
Thus, the first block would be the preparation. It will consist 
in the contextualization of the problem through the detailed 
readin g of the literature and the contact with entities. This first 
block is only defined by a single phase. This phase will be explained below.  
The first phase of the project which is the first and only phase 
of preparation will be established through an update d and 
integrating state of the art of the different sectors involved in the matter under investigation: current policies on equal opportunities between men and women and the promotion of technological studies for women, local, national and European plans and programmes to this aim; contacts and bibliographical 
analyses, some of the contacts will be with the Equality Units of 
the different universities, non -university academic centres, taking 
into account especially those services of the universities or training centres specialised in the gender perspective that may issue data from this line of research, such as the University of 
Salamanca, the Legal Clinic for Social Action, with special 
attention to the Observatory for University Employability and Employmen t of the UNESCO Chair, the National Institute of 
Statistics, the European Commission and the UN Women's Organisation. It will also include the opinion of young people on 
the subject of investigation, which is expressed through social 
networks such as Twitter and Facebook.   
Figure 2.  Diagram of work phases.  
Once the desired information has been collected, we will be 
taken to the research block. This research covers from the first 
questionnaire to the student body that meets the selection criteria 
to the final longitudinal cohort. The block is defined in three 
phases. The second phase characterized by the contact with the students and the realisation of questionnaires, semi -structured 
interviews and the Delphi method. The third phase of contrast, where the  information already collected will be contrasted with 
the information from the fieldwork. And a longitudinal cohort in 
the fourth phase to discern the changes in choice that have 
occurred in the target population.  
The second phase will consist in fieldwork with the 
participating target population through instruments such as questionnaires, the Likert scale and interviews to gather sufficient 
information to establish a reliable and valid diagnosis of the 
reality under study. The Delphi method will a lso be used. The 
instruments used will have to be validated at the time of their implementation at this stage. The interviews will be semi -
structured, as the information that may arise unexpectedly in the process is highly potential, however, it will be ba sed on an initial 
script. Together with these instruments we will also work withGender gap in the STEM sector in pre and university studies of 
Europe associated with ethnic factors  TEEM 2018, October 2018, Salamanca, Spain  
 
 989 the qualitative technique of focus groups, in which the objective 
is to know the opinion of the subjects.  
In the third phase the data from the two previous phases will 
be com pared: the documentary analysis of the state of the art and 
the information collected from the professionals and students from the different centres involved in the process. This will allow us to have a first reliable and valid diagnosis, through qualitati ve 
and quantitative content that supports the results. This work 
needs to be carried out to assess whether the conceptual 
framework matches the reality of young people, especially in the STEM sector.  
The last phase of the block, the fourth phase of the pro ject, is 
a study of the trajectory of these students, a case follow -up, with 
a case professional, in this case the doctoral student. This part will 
be the longitudinal study (the cohort) mentioned above, which 
will be carried out through semi -structured in terviews and 
questionnaires, more advanced than those of the second phase.  
In the last block, which also has a single phase, the evaluation of 
the process will be carried out. With the information that has been 
collected, it will be possible to propose pal liative measures to 
reduce the gender gap or to establish that the gender gap has 
decreased during the process.  
In this last phase the changes generated from the monitoring 
will be compiled, in order to be able to elaborate a trend of increase or decrease of the existing gender gap in this field.  
6 CONCLUSIONS  
Finally, from the current thesis Project, it is concluded that as 
the literature itself shows and as the studies establish, there is a field of research, analysis, programming and intervention, which 
is the gender gap that has been established within the STEM 
education sector.  
It is important that this reality be approached not only from 
the Universities, but also as it has been seen from other entities and multinationals. To this aim, it is especiall y important not to 
forget some aspects, such as the fact that within universities, 
women are the ones who reach the highest rates of graduates, 
high rates of performance and success, and they are also the ones 
who drop out of university studies the least.  
Therefore, the STEM sector is an important area for women, 
since they are under -represented. This is due to a series of social 
constructs that have been generated gradually, and that is why it is especially important to study the relationship between the gender gap and the culture. To analyse this aspect, the racial and ethnic origin of the person may be key.  
The present paper defines the research plan to follow. To 
perform this plan,  we will integrate the recipients, their 
motivations, preferences and int erests in the research process. Via 
the obtained results and  its diagnose it will be possible to 
implement action  measures, such as establishing new channels of 
effective and real equality in the representation of both sexes in 
this framework. 
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
This research work has been carried out within the University of 
Salamanca PhD Programme on Education in the Knowledge Society scope ( http://knowledgesociety.usal.es ) [45 -47] and was 
supported by the Spanish Ministerio de  Ciencia, Inovación y 
Universidades  under a FPU fellowship (FPU017/ 01252).  
REFERENCES  
[1] A. Rossi and M. Barajas. 2015. Gender imbalances in STEM career choice. 
ENSEÑANZA DE LAS CIENCIAS. Investigaciones didác ticas.  
[2] A. Bandura et al. 2001. Self-eﬃcacy Beliefs as Shapers of Children’s Aspirations 
and Career Trajectories.  Child Development.  72, 1 (2001), 187 –206. 
DOI:htt ps://doi.org/htt p://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467 -8624.00273.  
[3] M.M. Bleeker and J. Jacobs. 2004. Achievement in Math and Science: do 
Mothers’ Beliefs Ma tter 12 Years later? 96, 1 (2004), 97 –109. 
DOI:htt ps://doi.org/htt p://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022 -0663.96.1.97.  
[4] B. Davies. 2003.  Shards of Glass. Children Reading & Wr iting beyond Gendered 
Identities. Hampton Press.  
[5] M. López. 1995.  La elección de una carrera típicamente femenina o masculina 
desde una perspectiva psicosocial: análisis de las inﬂ uencias de género.  
[6] E. Renold. 2001. Learning the «Hard» Way: Boys, Hegemonic Masculinity and 
the Negotiation of Learner Identities in the Primary School.  British Journal of 
Sociology of Education.  22, 3 (2001), 369 –385. 
DOI:htt ps://doi.org/htt p://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01425690120067980.  
[7] B. Francis. 1998. Opposition al Positions: Children’s Construction of Gender in 
Talk and Role Plays Based on Adult Occupation.  Educational Research . 40, 1 
(1998), 31 –43. 
[8] C. Skelton. 2001. Schooling the boys. Masculinities and Primary Education.  Open 
University Press.  
[9] C. González -González et al. 2018. Gender and Engineering: Developing Actions 
to Encourage Women in Tech. 2018 IEEE Global Engineering Education 
Conference (EDUCON). 2088–2093.  
[10] Facts and ﬁgures of the Spanish university system.: 2018.  
www.mecd.gob.es/ dms/mecd/educacion -mecd/areas -educacion/ 
universidades/estadisticas -informes/datos -cifras/Datos -y-Cifras -del- SUE-Curso -
2014- 2015.pdf.  
[11] O. Dele -Ajayi et al. 2018. Exploring Digital Careers, Stereotypes and Diversity 
with Young People through Game Desig n and Implementation.  2018 IEEE 
Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON).  718–725. 
[12] S. Cheryan et al. 2013. Enduring inﬂ uence of stereotypical computer science role 
models on women’s academic aspirations.  Psychology of Women Quarterly.  37, 
1 (2013), 72 –79. 
[13] S. Cheryan et al. 2015. Cultural stereotypes as gatekeepers: increasing girls’ 
interest in computer science and engineering by diversifying stereotypes. 
Frontiers in psychology . 6, (2015).  
[14] R. Garris and R. Ahlers. 2002. Games, motivation, and learning: A research and 
practice model. Simulation & gaming.  33, 4 (2002), 441 –467. 
[15] N. Pancratz and I. Diethelm. 2018. Including Part -Whole -Thinking in a Girls’ 
Engineering Course through the Use of litt leBits. A Practica l Report on 
Including Part -Whole -Thinking into the Content of Computer Science 
Education. 2018 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON) . 1140 –
1144.  
[16] L. Zimmermann and G. Sprung. 2008. Technology is Female: How Girls Can Be 
Motivated to Lea rn Programming and Take up Technical Studies through 
Adaptations of the Curriculum, Changes in Didactics, and Optimized Interface 
Design. In Proceedings of ICEE 08.  
[17] R. Strachan et al. 2018. Women in Engineering: Addressing the Gender Gap, 
Exploring Tr ust and our Unconscious Bias. 2018 IEEE Global Engineering 
Education Conference (EDUCON) . 2094 –2099.  
[18] A. García -Holgado et al. 2018. Inclusion of gender perspective in Computer 
Engineering careers. Elaboration of a questionnaire to assess the gender ga p in 
Tertiary Education. 2018 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference 
(EDUCON).  1553–1560.  
[19] Jefatura del Estado. 2007. LEY ORGÁNICA 3/2007, de 22 de marzo, para la 
igualdad efectiva de mujeres y hombres. Boletín O ﬁcial del Estado.  
[20] 2017. Diagnóstico Previo. Plan de Igualdad de Oportunidades entre Mujeres y 
Hombres de la UVa 2016 -2020. Universidad de Valladolid.  
[21] 2014. II Informe de situación sobre la presencia equilibrada de mujeres y 
hombres en la Universidad de Salamanca 2007 -2013. Universidad de Salamanca.  
[22] Elsevier Foundation. 2017. Gender in the Global Research Landscape.  Elsevier.  
[23] B. Biglia and J. Bonet i Martí. 2017. DIY: Towards feminist methodological 
practices in social research. 13, (2017).TEEM 20 18, October 2018, Salamanca, Spain S. Verdugo -Castro  et al.  
 
 
 990 [24] P. Paderewski et al. 2015. Acercando las mujeres a la ingeniería: iniciativas y 
estrategias que favorecen su inclusión. XVI Congreso Internacional de Interacción 
Persona- Ordenador | Workshop Engendering Technology (II). 319–326. 
[25] A. Peixoto et al. 2018. Diversity and Inclu sion in Engineering Education: 
Looking Through the Gender Question. 2018 IEEE Global Engineering Education 
Conference (EDUCON) . 2077 –2081.  
[26] M.C. Rodríguez et al. 2014. Rendimiento en la PAU y elección de estudios 
Cientíﬁco-Tecnológicos en razón de gén ero. REOP -Revista Española de 
Orientación y Psicopedagogía. 25, 1 (2014), 111 –127. 
[27] Rochester Institute of Technology: 2018. 
https://www.rit.edu/ kgcoe/women/highlight/encouraging -more -girls-choose-
career- engineering . 
[28] Universidad de Michigan: 2018. http://www.wise.umich.edu. 
[29] IGNITE. Inspiring Girls Now In Technology: 2018. 
http://www.igniteworldwide.org/  
[30] Technov ation Challenge.: 2018. http://technovat ionchallenge. org/. 
[31] Proyecto europeo ICT-Go-Girls! http://www. ictgogirls.eu/ Informe de la 
política de la Comisión Europea respecto a la igualdad de género.: 2018.  
http://ec.europa.eu/research/swafs/index. cfm?pg=pol icy&lib=gender.  
[32] FESTA (Female Empowerment in Science and Technology Academia): 2018. 
http://www.festa-europa. eu/. 
[33] Genis-Lab (The Gender in Science and Technology Lab): 2018.  
http://www.geni slab-fp7.eu/. 
[34] Proyecto HELEN A (Higher Educ ation Leading to Engineering and Scientiﬁc 
Careers): 2018.  http://www.fp7-helena.org. 
[35] Proyecto TWIST (Towards Women in Science and Technologies): 2018.  
http://www.the-twist-project.eu/. 
[36] Proyecto WISAT (Women in Global Science and Technologies).: 2018.  
http://wisat.org/. 
[37] C. González-González et al. 2018. Gender and Engineering: Developing Actions 
to Encourage Women in Tech. 2018 IEEE Global Engineeri ng Education 
Conference (EDUCO N). 2088–2093.  [38] 2011.  Ethical guidelines for educational research. BERA British Educational 
Research Association. 
[39] M. Torres, K. Paz and F. Salazar. 2006. Tamaño de una muestra para una 
investigación de mercado. Universidad Rafael Landívar: Boletín electrónico [en 
línea]. 2018. http://www. tec. url. edu. gt/boletin/URL_02_B AS02. pdf. 
[40] M.C. Sánchez-Gómez et al. 2012. El proceso de la investigación cualitativa. 
Manual de procedimiento: ejempliﬁcación con una tesis doctoral. Editorial 
Edintras. 
[41] G. King et al. 1994. Designing Social Inquiry. Scientiﬁc Inference in Qualitative 
Research. 
[42] M.C. Delgado. 2014. Viajando a Ítaca por mares cuantitativos: manual de ruta 
para investigar en grado y postgrado. Ama rú. 
[43] M.C. Sánchez-Gómez and M.V. Martín-Cilleros. 2017.  Implementation of focus 
group in health research. Computer Supported Qualitative Research. Springer 
Cham. 49–61. 
[44] M.V. Martín-Cilleros et al. 2017. Assessment of a technological education design 
to prevent school dropout. RISTI-Revista Ibérica de Sistemas e Tecnologias de 
Informação. (2017), 61–67. 
[45] F. J. García-Peñalvo. 2014.  Formación en la sociedad del conoc imiento, un 
programa de doctorado con una perspectiva interdisciplinar. Educ ation in the 
Knowledge Society 15, 1, 4-9. 
[46] F. J. García-Peñalvo, M. S. Ramírez-Montoya, and A. García-Holgado. 2017.  
TEEM  2017 Doctoral Consortium Track. In Fifth International Conference on 
Technological Ecosystems for Enha ncing Multiculturality (TEEM ’17) (Cádiz, 
Spain, October 18-20, 2017)  J.M. Dodero, M.S. Ibarra Sáiz and I. Ruiz Rube Eds. 
ACM , New York, NY, USA, Article 93. DOI:10.1145/3144826.3145440. 
[47] F. J. García-Peñalvo. 2017.  Educ ation in the Knowledge Society PhD 
Programme. 2017 Kick-oﬀ Meeting. In Proceedings of the Seminarios del 
Programa de Doctorado en Formación en la Sociedad del Conocimiento (16 de 
noviembre de 2017) (Salamanca, España2017). Instituto Universitario de 
Ciencias de la Educación.