Making Black Lives Matte r in the Information  
Technology Profession 
Eileen Trauth 
Pennsylvania State University 
330C IST Building 
University Park, PA 16802 
1.814.865.6457 
etrauth@ist.psu.edu 
 K.D. Joshi 
Washington State University 
Todd 437J 
Pullman, WA 99164 
1.509.335.5722 
joshi@wsu.edu 
            Lynette Kvasny 
Pennsylvania State University author’s  
329C IST Building 
University Park, PA 16802 
1.814.865.6458 
lyarger@ist.psu.edu 
 
   Allison J. Morgan 
Howard University 
2600 Sixth St., N.W., Rm. 448 
Washington D.C. 20059 
1.202-806-1605 
aj_morgan@howard.edu Fay Cobb Payton 
North Carolina State University 
Campus Box 7229 
Raleigh, NC 27695 
1.919.513.2744 
fay_payton@ncsu.edu 
 
ABSTRACT  
The phrase “social change is a beau tiful thing,” appeared in a tweet 
from a student during demonstrations at the University of Missouri 
in November 2015. The events that motivated this tweet point to the 
work that still needs to occur to bring greater racial equality to 
American society. In this regard, a question for IT professionals, 
both academics and practitioners, is: “What can the SIGMIS CPR 
community do to foster greater inclusion of underrepresented racial 
and ethnic groups into our profession?” These panelists provide 
some answers to this question by discussing their research and 
interventions to diversify the IT fi eld and promote greater racial and 
ethnic representation within it.   
Keywords  
African American men; Career choice; Digital Divide; Diversity; 
Ethnicity; Inequality; IT workforce; Race 
1. PANEL DESCRIPTION 
Eileen Trauth moderates the panel and discusses the results of an 
empirical study of the influence of gender-ethnic intersectionality 
on gender stereotypes about the IT profession. Analysis of survey 
responses from over 4000 contemporary American university 
students reveals significant within-gender differences, based on race 
and ethnicity, in gender stereotypes of the IT field. These findings 
suggest promising avenues for interv entions to address not only the 
masculine gender stereotyping of skills in the IT profession, but also 
differential gender stereotyping of technical vs. nontechnical skills 
and variation in gender stereoty ping by the intersectionality of 
gender-ethnic groups. She also di scusses two other studies which 
address underrepresentation in the IT field: military service 
members with disabilities and theatr e as an intervention to address 
stereotypes about the IT field.  
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of  part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for 
profit or commercial advantage and that copies  bear this notice and the full citation on 
the first page. Copyrights for third-party com ponents of this work must be honored. For 
all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copy right is held by the owner/author(s).  
SIGMIS-CPR ‘16, June 2-4, 2016, Alexandria, VA, USA.   
ACM 978-1-4503-4203-2/16/06. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2890602.2890617   
 
  
K.D. Joshi describes the use of Bourdieu’s framework to investigate 
how Black men succeed in IT careers by accumulating the 
following five forms of capital—  Cultural, Social, Symbolic, 
Technical, and Economic.  The accumulated capital affects Black 
men’s IT career choices both positively and negatively. In addition, 
she talks about the effects of “Being a Black Man” in IT, i.e., the 
negative experiences (such as frequent encounters with police, 
pressures of belonging to a gang, and dealing with the expectations 
of hegemonic Black masculinity), as well as positive experiences 
(such as more opportunities because of their underrepresentation in 
IT, and being viewed as competent because of low academic 
expectations), which have much broader implications (beyond IT 
careers).   
Lynette Kvasny and Fay Cobb Payton use the intersectionality 
framework proposed by Crenshaw and social media content to 
inform a talk on how Black facult y and college students cope with 
their intersectional experiences of race/ethnicity and gender 
inequality.  Current events discussed in both mass and social media 
indicate that Black students and faculty continuously experience 
racial tensions on college campuses.  The emerging social 
movements around the hashtag #BlacksLivesMatter and the tweet 
“social change is a beautiful thing” clearly articulate the need for 
social and structural changes at predominantly white institutions. 
They discuss the impacts of these movements relative to faculty and 
students in IT disciplines because th e stress of “racial battle fatigue” 
can be compounded for Black students in majors where they are 
woefully underrepresented and where there are few Black faculty 
mentors present.   
Allison Morgan discusses the role of historically Black colleges and 
universities (HBCU’s) in addressi ng the underrepresentation of 
minorities in STEM and producing top talent in multiple technical 
areas.  HBCU’s are valuable in not only  educating technical 
professionals, they are also a vehicle to bring awareness to the 
importance of Black issues in relation to technology and key to 
spearheading discussion about ‘Black Lives Matter’ in all areas of 
the educational process.  Lastly, she talks about the need and the 
value for a diversity of people in the development of IT processes 
(such a search).    
1232. PANELISTS 
Dr. Eileen Trauth is Professor of Information Sciences & 
Technology, and Women’s, Gender & Sexuality Studies at The 
Pennsylvania State University. Her research is concerned with 
societal, cultural and organizational influences on the information 
technology professions with a special focus on gender and social 
inclusion. Dr. Trauth has lectured about and investigated issues of 
gender underrepresentation in the information technology 
professions in Europe, Africa and the Asia Pacific, and throughout 
the United States. She is currently studying the intersectionality of 
gender and identity characteristics such as ethnicity, socio-economic 
class, sexuality, nationality and disability status. Dr. Trauth is editor 
of Information Systems Journal, the Encyclopedia of Gender and 
Information Technology, and two conferen ce proceedings on 
diversity and social inclusion. She is the recipient of the 2008 
Universität Klagenfurt (Austria) – Fulbright Distinguished Chair in 
Gender Studies, and serves on the advisory board for the European 
Union project, Female Empowerment in  Science & Technology 
Academia (FESTA). With funding from the National Science 
Foundation, she has written a play, iDream (iDreamThePlay.com ), 
based on her interviews with women in the information technology 
field, as a way to increase awareness about gender barriers in the 
scientific and technological professions. 
Dr. K. D. Joshi is the Philip L. Kays Distinguished Professor of 
Information Systems at Washington State University. She received 
her Master of Science in Engineering from the University of 
Michigan and received her Doctor of Philosophy in Business 
Administration from the University of Kentucky.  Dr. Joshi’s 
research interests focus on IT Workforce, Knowledge Management, 
Crowdsourcing, IT-Enabled Innov ation, Value Sensitive Designs, 
and Health IT.  Her published research is cited over 3,500 times (h-index: 22; i10-index: 35). She ha s received multiple research grants 
worth $1.93M from the National Sc ience Foundation that focus on 
social inclusion by broadening the participation and representation 
of women and minorities in STEM di sciplines.  She was also a Co-
Principle Investigator on the In stitutional Transformation Grant 
worth $3.75M which Washington State University received from NSF to advance women in STEM disciplines. Her research has 
appeared in journals such as Information Systems Research,  MIS 
Quarterly, Decision Support Systems, IEEE TEM, and 
Communications of the ACM.   Dr. Joshi is currently a Senior Editor 
of the Information Systems Journal  and Information Systems 
Management  journal. She is a Special Section Editor for Social 
Inclusion and IS at the DATABASE Journal. She is an Associate 
Editor of the Communications of the AIS  and Journal of 
Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce . 
Dr. Lynette Kvasny is an Associ ate Professor in the College of 
Information Sciences and Technology. She earned her Ph.D. in Computer Information Systems  from the Robinson College of 
Business  at Georgia State University . Her research focuses on how 
and why historically underserved groups use information and 
communication technologies. She has designed, implemented and 
assessed community computing projects in economically challenged 
neighborhoods in Atlanta, West Ph iladelphia, and Harrisburg. She is 
also a co-founder of the social network experience that focuses on health and social media interventions for African American collegians: MyHealthImpactNetwork. Her current research examines the performance of racial and gender identities in the 
construction of social media content by African American teens and 
young adults, and the IT career pathways of African American 
males. Dr. Kvasny’s research has been supported by the National 
Science Foundation (including the prestigious Career Award), the 
Oracle Help Us Help Foundation,  AmeriCorps VISTA, the Penn 
State Children, Youth and Family Consortium, and the Penn State Africana Research Center.  
Dr. Allison J. Morgan is an Asso ciate Professor of Information 
Systems and Supply Chain Management and the Director of Special 
Programs at the Howard University School of Business. She 
received her Ph.D. in Information Sciences and Technology from 
The Pennsylvania State University and a B.B.A. in Computer Based 
Information Systems from Howard Un iversity. She is one of only 
50 African American Female Information Systems Business School Professors in the United States. Her research focuses on online 
health information, human information searching behavior, 
diversity of the information technology workforce, and the socio-
cultural impact of technology. She has published articles on the 
impact of individual differences on user behavior, diversity in the 
global workplace, information searching behavior, and gender and 
information technology with specific  focus on social networks and 
work-life balance among women. She has received grants from Facebook, The National Science Foundation, and the GM 
Foundation.  She has a true passi on for teaching and for students, 
and loves nothing more than to be in the classroom.  She was formerly employed as a consultant  at Accenture and as a Usability 
Engineer at the United States Census Bureau. She is a member of the Ph.D. Project, Association for Information Systems (AIS), and 
the Golden Key National Honor Society. 
 
Dr. Fay Cobb Payton is Professor of Information 
Systems/Technology in the Poole Co llege of Management at North 
Carolina State University. With support from the National Science Foundation, she founded and directs MyHealthImpactNetwork, a 
social network focusing on health and social media interventions. @MyHealthImpact gives “voice” to millennials about sexual and 
mental health, culture, and technology. She authored Leveraging 
Intersectionality: Seeing and Not Seeing, an anthology of research on STEM education in academe and corporate environments. Dr. 
Payton is an editor of Health Systems , and Associate Editor of 
Decision Sciences and Information Technology & People . She is a 
member of the NC State University Women in Science and 
Engineering Advisory Board. She received the National Coalition of 
Women in Information Technol ogy Undergraduate Mentoring 
Award. As an American Council on Education (ACE) Fellow, she shadowed over 30 national and international academic leaders to 
understand the educational models of research, outreach and 
technology innovation, and worked on issues of academic review, 
interdisciplinary graduate research and education, and institutional 
economic and community impact. She worked in engineering, 
consulting and corporate IT at International Business Machines, 
Ernst & Young/CAP Gemini and Ti me Inc. before joining the 
academy.  Her research has been supported by the National Science Foundation, National Institutes of  Health, KPMG Foundation, NC 
State University, NC State University Foundation and AT&T.  
  
124