Examining the Intersections of Race, Religion & Community 
Technologies: A Photovoice Study 
Teresa K. O’Leary Elizabeth Stowell Jessica A. Hofman 
oleary.t@northeastern.edu stowell.e@northeastern.edu j.hofman@northeastern.edu 
Northeastern University Northeastern University Northeastern University 
Boston, MA Boston, MA Boston, MA 
Michael Paasche-Orlow Timothy Bickmore Andrea G. Parker 
mpo@bu.edu t.bickmore@northeastern.edu andrea@cc.gatech.edu 
Boston University School of Medicine Northeastern University Georgia Institute of Technology 
Boston Medical Center Boston, MA Atlanta, GA 
Boston, MA 
ABSTRACT 
Churches have historically played an important role in Black Amer-
ican communities, catalyzing the pursuit of aims such as social 
justice, community organization, and health promotion. However, 
researchers have rarely examined how technology can support an 
assets-based approach to these eforts, nor the implications of race, 
traditions, and history when creating such systems. Addressing 
this gap, we conducted research with two predominantly Black 
churches to explore health promotion design opportunities. We 
used photovoice, a research method where participants led their 
own data collection and analysis. Participants provided nuanced 
descriptions of the racial and ethnic identities of their communities, 
and how church history and aspirations for the future impacted 
these identities. Our fndings characterize tensions between tradi-
tion and ‘modernization,’ implications for technology design, and 
the need for a temporal approach to understanding communities. 
We conclude with broader implications for studying the intersection 
of race and religion in community technology design. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → Human computer interac-
tion (HCI); Collaborative content creation. 
KEYWORDS 
HCI, Community HCI, technospiritual practices, race, religion, pho-
tovoice, assets-based approach 
ACM Reference Format: 
Teresa K. O’Leary, Elizabeth Stowell, Jessica A. Hofman, Michael Paasche-
Orlow, Timothy Bickmore, and Andrea G. Parker. 2021. Examining the 
Intersections of Race, Religion & Community Technologies: A Photovoice 
Study. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21), 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the 
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specifc permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8096-6/21/05...$15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445418 May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 19 pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445418 
1 INTRODUCTION 
HCI as a feld has long been interested in the study of commu-
nities [34]. A subset of this work has focused on geographically 
defned communities [26, 73, 83]. However, prior HCI research on 
communities has been less focused on the topic of race. Race is a 
socially constructed concept in which people are grouped based 
on physical traits (e.g., skin color and hair textures) [20, 90]. Im-
portantly, racial classifcations themselves are only one part of 
understanding race and its implications. As a social construct, race 
refects how societies have interpreted and defned the meanings 
of these people groupings, and in turn, shaped experiences and 
access to resources and power [88, 89]. Conceptualizations of race 
and defnitions of racial categories have evolved over time, and 
difer across the globe. For example, some countries use the term 
“race,” others “ethnicity,” and yet others use both [58]. This gap 
in race-focused HCI research exists despite the cultural, political, 
and socioeconomic implications of these groupings [90]. Across 
the globe, race plays a role in how communities form and evolve, 
are defned by themselves and others, as well as the types of re-
sources available within communities, their cultural heritage (e.g, 
traditions and values), and how they interact with other commu-
nities. In the United States (U.S.) in particular, the history of de 
jure racial segregation along with continued modern segregation 
reproduces numerous social inequities. While the U.S. has become 
more racially and ethnically diverse [27], its communities remain 
segregated, subjecting them to inequitable access to basic human 
rights (e.g., health care, education, housing, employment opportu-
nities) [40]. In addition to segregation, gentrifcation has led to the 
displacement of communities of color, further exacerbating these 
inequities [18]. Work in U.S. communities has demonstrated how 
racial heterogeneity in neighborhoods impacts trust [54], as well 
as how race and racialized experiences shape neighborhood social 
ties and patterns of neighbor interactions [60]. This prior work 
has overwhelmingly demonstrated the central place that research 
on race must have in the study of communities, and this includes 
research focused on technology. Indeed, researchers have demon-
strated how inattention to race when developing technology has 
led to numerous unintentional consequences for diferent racialCHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan O’Leary and Stowell, et al. 
minorities (e.g., infrared sensors unresponsive to darker skin tones, 
policing software that predicts criminal recidivism using racially-
biased data sets) [5, 35]. Indeed, even well-intentioned designs can 
lead to racist socio-technical systems. 
Recently, there has been a call to engage critically with race 
when designing, developing, and evaluating socio-technical sys-
tems [61]. Such engagement requires the use of methods which 
seek to democratize the design process [38]. Researchers are en-
couraged to critically refect on issues of race at all stages of the 
development process, and seek out opportunities to amplify and 
center voices of color [81]. In this paper, we present a case study of 
such critical refection on and engagement with the concept of race 
in community-focused HCI research. Specifcally, we report on our 
work designing a faith-based mobile health (mHealth) intervention 
with predominantly Black churches. 
In the United States, churches play a central role within the Black 
community, fostering social action and community mobilization 
eforts for systemic social and political eforts [12, 66, 79]. These 
community organizations are a source of a variety of resources and 
social support for both members and non-members [79]. Churches 
have been integral in addressing race-based health inequities, serv-
ing as sites for various community-based health promotion events 
and interventions [66]. Additional afordances of community spaces, 
health ministry initiatives, local community-based resources, and 
regular access to priority populations have made churches an es-
sential resource in establishing health promotion programs [12]. 
While church-based health promotion programs in the Black com-
munity have shown promise, racial health disparities persist. These 
programs are limited by church capacity (e.g., volunteer hours and 
funding), and are often only accessible to church members who 
are able to currently and regularly attend church and who live 
locally [7]. Within HCI, a growing body of literature has shown the 
potential of mobile applications to promote health and well-being, 
including among racial and ethnic minority groups [46, 77]. Indeed, 
the proliferation of information communication technology (ICT) 
use by churches [ 4] and smartphone ownership among racial and 
ethnic minority groups [14] provides an opportunity for technol-
ogy mediated health promotion. Despite the promise of mHealth, 
little work has explored how such technology can augment the 
afordances of the church context to promote health and well-being 
in these communities. 
In our work, we examine this intersection of race, religion, and 
community as we explore how technology can promote well-being 
in churches with historically Black memberships. We report on 
results from four sessions (two focus groups, one afnity diagram-
ming session, and one photovoice session) conducted in our for-
mative work. Our fndings help to answer the questions: a) how 
do we characterize and untangle the intricacies of racial identity 
in community organizations? b) how can we address the tension 
between “innovation” and maintaining the integrity of historical 
community spaces? c) how do we design for multicultural church 
communities? The contribution of our work is both topical and 
methodological. Our work provides a case study of how HCI can 
approach the study of race in a community context, and will help to 
further catalyze research in the HCI focal areas of technospiritual 
design, race, and community technologies. In addition, we include 
a refection on our method and recommendations for future HCI researchers exploring how racial and ethnic identity may infuence 
technology design. 
1.1 Refexivity Statement 
Recently, HCI researchers have highlighted how authors’ identities 
and backgrounds can shape their interpretations of their work, and 
that to embark upon social justice research requires a commitment 
to refexivity [23, 74]. The composition of racial, ethnic, and reli-
gious identities of our research team provides critical context to 
our fndings, and may help members of the research community in-
terpret our work [74]. The authors of this paper come from a range 
of faith backgrounds. Multiple authors grew up and two continue 
to attend various Protestant churches. Two authors are religiously 
observant Jews. One author is African American and the remainder 
are White. The frst and second author facilitated participant activ-
ities and led the qualitative data analysis. Both identify as White 
women. The frst author was raised attending a Catholic Church. 
She currently attends a multicultural Unitarian Universalist Church. 
The second author was raised attending a predominantly White, 
Congregationalist church. She currently does not attend church. 
We share our backgrounds to acknowledge that, while the au-
thors of this paper shared some religious vocabulary with church 
members, there could be nuances unique to the participants’ reli-
gious communities that we potentially missed. In addition, we had 
a longstanding research relationship with participants prior to the 
photovoice sessions; however, we acknowledge that discussing is-
sues of race with the frst and second authors may have potentially 
limited the experiences participants felt comfortable exploring. As 
a result, our identities may have shaped this work, including our 
analysis of our fndings. 
2 RELATED WORK 
Our work characterizes community members’ perceptions of how 
race impacts their experiences within their community organiza-
tion, in this case, two protestant faith communities. Furthermore, 
our fndings explore how racial and ethnic identities should be 
incorporated, celebrated, and amplifed, from member perspectives, 
when developing community-based health technology systems. We 
focus on race and religion in place-based communities. 
2.1 Community Based Organizations (CBOs) 
and HCI 
Within HCI, there’s been an increasing focus on the domain of 
Community Informatics (CI), in which ICTs are leveraged to “enable 
and empower community processes” [34]. A subset of this work has 
examined the context of geographically focused communities, and 
in particular, community-based organizations (CBOs). CBOs are 
often trusted entities within their communities, and can serve as an 
entry-point for reaching priority populations [57]; however, CBOs 
pose additional design challenges when balancing the values and 
practices of multiple stakeholders [82]. CI research in the context 
of CBOs has explored a broad range of topics, including increasing 
volunteer capacity [83, 84], increasing civic engagement [26, 43, 47], 
and supporting activists [42]. In addition, a relatively small number 
of HCI studies have anchored the design of health technologies— 
such as mHealth tools—in the context of a CBO [77]. Most of thisExamining the Intersections of Race, Religion & Community Technologies: A Photovoice Study CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
work has focused on schools [6, 48, 51, 55, 68], public housing [52], 
and community centers [65, 72]. 
However, despite the many public health interventions that have 
been designed for churches, little work has explored how tech-
nology can support and augment health promotion eforts within 
church communities [45, 78]. And yet, such communities repre-
sent promising contexts for technology-enabled well-being initia-
tives. Kaziunas et al. have argued for the important healthcare 
services and resources that churches provide to their populations 
in need, including those most vulnerable and socially marginal-
ized [45]. Despite the care they provide, churches are often excluded 
from technology-enabled community health record systems, creat-
ing a disconnect from a broader network of community care [45]. 
They contend that churches provide meaningful and critical care to 
marginalized communities, and thus should be included when de-
veloping sociotechnical community systems. We expand upon this 
work by exploring churches as important CBOs in which to ground 
technologies that promote well-being, and through our specifc 
focus on the cultural context of predominantly Black churches. Fur-
thermore, we contribute more broadly to community-focused HCI, 
as to date, little focus has been placed on race and racial identity in 
community technology design [61]. 
2.2 Technospirital Work in Communities 
Examining how technology is used to engage in spiritual and reli-
gious practices, defned as technospiritual practices, is a burgeoning 
feld of study. This work aims to understand how technology can 
enrich religious and spiritual expression and participation with-
out disrupting core values, beliefs, and traditions [4]. This body of 
work largely explores how technology can support personal spiri-
tual practices [91], enhance spiritual experiences [ 4], and through 
its integration into religious services, can transform experiences of 
worship [93, 94]. 
Various technologies have been designed to support religious 
practices and spiritual experiences. These systems support par-
ticipation in religious activities such as Islamic pilgrimages [53], 
individual activities such as Muslim and Christian prayer [4, 92], 
prayer exchanges between those in the same religious commu-
nity [11], spiritual education [11], viewing sermons or religious 
teachings of prominent religious leaders [11], and everday mindful-
ness practices of Pentocostal users [91]. Researchers have explored 
how technology can be used to connect members to their faith 
communities even when geographically separated [76]. In a study 
of protestant church communities, Stowell et al. found that church 
members were motivated to provide computer-mediated spiritual 
support to other members of their community by participating in 
a variety of crowdsourcing tasks [78]. These works have shown 
that, even in social contexts where technology adoption may seem 
antithetical to traditional religious expression and activities, tech-
nology can enhance everyday spiritual practices and may even be 
welcomed when participants are centered in the design process. 
Integration of technology into church services has demonstra-
bly grown in recent years; however, churches have incorporated 
technology to varying degrees [93]. Wyche et al., characterized 
the technology use in mega church services, and found that the 
prevalence of technology, such as digital displays in sanctuaries and personal computing devices, is constrained by church resources, 
infrastructural capacity, and preferences of church community 
members [93, 94]. Her work identifes tensions between remaining 
‘reverant’ of sanctuary halls while also fnding ways to embody 
relevance through technology integration [93]. Wyche et al.’s work 
calls attention to the need for identifying the unique social fac-
tors, variation in technology attitudes of members and leaders, and 
distinct infrastructures that could promote or impede technology 
integration [93, 94]. 
While research in technospiritual design has grown, it still re-
mains an understudied area in HCI research [11]. Our work extends 
that of Wyche and other technospiritual HCI researchers by explor-
ing current tensions in technology integration using a historical 
and future oriented approach. By understanding a church’s present 
mission and ministerial focus, as well as their future trajectories, 
we better contextualize current member attitudes toward technol-
ogy. Church communities are not static organizations. They change 
leadership, adapt to current societal factors, respond to the needs 
of old and new members, and have rich histories, all which impacts 
the integration of technology in their community. We question how 
and when technology should be used within religious communities. 
Our work highlights the tension between embracing new technolo-
gies and questioning whether technology integration is, in fact, 
progress in certain contexts. We expand upon prior work on tech-
nospiritual practices through our focus on racial identities within 
a church community and the implications of these intersectional 
identities on technology design. Furthermore, we call attention to 
the need for research to critically examine the impact of race on 
technology design for faith communities to better understand how 
we can respond to diferences in temporal changes, priorities, and 
goals. 
2.3 Dialectical Model of the Black Church 
Historically, social scientists have characterized the Black Church, 
a term that refers to seven major Protestant denominations that 
serve predominantly Black members [64], using various models that 
overemphasize social deprivation as an explanation for the power of 
the institution and religious participation in the Black Church [59]. 
Such models hypothesize that continued religious participation 
from constituents stems from a history of systemic oppression that 
has denied Black Americans access to social resources. Taylor et al. 
state such models lead to oversimplifed characterizations of the 
Black Church, with a lack of attention to social context and varia-
tions between these communities [79]. Instead, researchers propose 
a dialectical model of the Black Church [59], which examines the 
historical origins, immediate circumstances, and adaptations to 
larger societal conditions [79]. This theoretical model provides a 
series of dialectical dimensions which demonstrate tensions that 
exist within and between church communities with predominantly 
Black membership [49, 59, 79]. Such contrasting dimensions more 
thoroughly explain church identities, missions, and the resources 
they provide [2, 79]. This model afords researchers better ways to 
identify assets (e.g., community member skills, physical resources, 
community relationships [15]) and current conditions when de-
veloping sociotechnical systems for predominantly Black church 
communities.CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan O’Leary and Stowell, et al. 
We draw on the dialectic model of the Black Church in our anal-
ysis [59]. This model explores six tensions that, in combination, 
provide a holistic approach in examining the orientation and reli-
gious expression of a Black church community [79]. Defning all 
six tensions is outside the scope of this paper; however, the frst 
dialectical tension that describes the orientation of a church’s mis-
sion, priestly or prophetic, is particularly useful when designing 
sociotechnical systems. Priestly functions include those organiza-
tional activities that promote and facilitate the spiritual worship and 
connection of church members within the institution (e.g., focus on 
spiritual growth, social gatherings), whereas prophetic functions 
extend beyond priestly to emphasize activities that focus on change, 
temporal needs, and social action [2, 59]. While churches may incor-
porate both sets of functions, most emphasize one or the other [2]. 
Identifying the orientation of a church’s mission may help identify 
and prioritize the functions required of a technology system. We 
use this model to examine the intersection of racial/ethnic identity 
and religion in this work. 
2.4 Community-Engagement through 
Photovoice 
In our work designing technology for church communities, we 
acknowledge that systems of power that impact racial inequity cre-
ate an imbalance in the research process and require engagement 
from the community at all phases [44]. In an attempt to disrupt this 
imbalance, we used a photo-elicitation method called Photovoice. 
Photovoice has a long history as a qualitative method used in civic 
engagement in a variety of public health pursuits to inform housing 
opportunities [67], health promotion [39], and understand the lived 
experiences of chronic illnesses [39, 80]. Photovoice is a fexible and 
accessible method that requires only that participants use a camera 
to explore matters of relevance [33, 39, 85]. Through photovoice, 
community members capture authentic and genuine refections of 
their communities [85]. Using community member photos to drive 
subsequent interviews, participants are not passive but active cata-
lysts in identifying and addressing their most pressing concerns, as 
well as celebrating their community’s strengths [13, 85–87]. Impor-
tantly, these representations are captured by participants instead 
of the researcher. In leading the data collection, participants can 
communicate subtle but signifcant details that may, in researcher-
led data collection, be ultimately missed [85]. Based on feminist 
theory, photovoice celebrates local expertise in favor of researchers’ 
observations, and encourages community member participation 
throughout the analysis process [10, 67]. 
Photovoice is particularly useful when members of the research 
team are not members of the community and can disrupt the power 
imbalance between participant and researcher [ 3, 69]. Photovoice 
is an assets-based, afrming research method where participants 
engage in critical dialogue with both researchers and community 
stakeholders [10, 86]. In recent years, HCI researchers have made a 
similar call to incorporate assets-based approaches into the design 
of technology, and have used similar approaches of selecting af-
frming workshop activities that address goals held by participants, 
and celebrate strengths [15, 21, 24, 38]. 
Photovoice has been helpful in understanding the implications 
of self-identifed racial identity on providing culturally sensitive and competent care [71]. It has been used in examining spirituality 
as a protective factor in low-income Black adolescents [36]. In 
our examination of the impact of race on technology design for 
faith communities, we understood that explicitly talking about 
race can be sensitive, especially in a focus group context with 
members of the research team who are White. Photo elicitation 
activities have been useful in facilitating conversations that may be 
difcult [3]. Through these photovoice activities, participants were 
able to process and explore questions about race as they relate to 
their faith communities. Their photographs helped to anchor this 
dialogue by allowing participants to refect on situations, events, 
and experiences together using a new subjective lens, as well as 
stimulate latent memories that otherwise could be forgotten during 
traditional interview methods [37, 39]. 
3 METHOD 
This work is part of the formative frst year of a four year project to 
design, develop, and evaluate an mHealth intervention in churches 
with predominantly Black membership. The focus of our frst year 
was to work directly with church members using an assets-based 
approach to identify community strengths, and to engage church 
members in the design of the mHealth application. In this paper, we 
report on four sessions: two focus group sessions that provided re-
searchers with context on the church community and technologies 
used, an afnity diagram session, and a photo elicitation activity 
called photovoice. 
3.1 Participant Recruitment 
We partnered with an organization that provides resources to over 
a hundred faith-based organizations (e.g., churches) with ethnically-
diverse members near our city in the Northeast U.S.. In this paper, 
we refer to this organization as the ‘partner organization.’ This 
organization identifed two churches to support the formative year 
of the project. 
We worked closely with health ministry leaders from both churches 
to identify members of each community who could provide difer-
ent perspectives and expertise regarding the strengths and needs 
of their respective church communities. Participants were eligi-
ble to participate in the formative work if they were 18 years or 
older, self-identifed as a member of one of the two churches, were 
English-speaking, and owned a smartphone. We actively sought out 
participants with various levels of “embeddedness” in the church 
community to represent a cross section of experiences refected in 
the church laity. Participants were consented at the start of forma-
tive work by a project member. 
Prior to engaging the participants in discussions of racial and 
ethnic identity through photovoice, participants had each taken 
part in seven focus groups of 2-3 hours each. The frst four focus 
groups explored various dimensions of participant experiences in 
their church communities (e.g., religious practices, social support, 
health priorities, and technology use), helping us gain important 
context about the church communities before exploring concepts 
for technology-based interventions. The 5th focus group engaged 
participants in the design of preliminary concepts for a health app, 
allowing us to examine opportunities for app-based support as 
well as feature requirements important to the participants [62].Examining the Intersections of Race, Religion & Community Technologies: A Photovoice Study CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
The sixth and seventh focus groups explored opportunities for 
crowdsourcing to promote health in faith communities [78]. Given 
that the smartphone application will be implemented within the 
faith community, greater characterization and contextualization of 
the community was necessary. 
3.2 Sessions 1 & 2: Focus Groups 
3.2.1 Session 1: Understanding Church Community. We conducted 
a two-hour facilitated discussion wherein we asked participants 
to describe their Church community from their perspective. Par-
ticipants were encouraged to describe the activities they engage 
in, who they engage in those activities with, an overview of the 
church’s history, as well as their perceptions of church leaders. We 
ended the session by asking participants to refect on the role their 
church has played in their life. The aim of this session was to learn 
about the participants’ church communities. 
3.2.2 Session 2: Current Technology Practices. During this two hour 
facilitated discussion, we asked participants to describe their cur-
rent use of technology and its potential benefts and constraints. 
Inspiration cards were created to help participants brainstorm on 
the range of technologies that they may or may not use. In addition, 
we asked specifcally how their use of technology has supported 
their spiritual practices, religious expression, and health. We ended 
the session asking participants to describe what technology (if 
any) is used in their church, including both technology to enhance 
church services and programs, and communication technology. 
Both sessions provided us with critical background on the church 
communities, and motivated a more explicit discussion about race. 
3.3 Session 3: Photovoice Introduction 
To begin the session, we asked participants to defne the racial 
and ethinc makeup of their community to guide the terminology 
we then used in the subsequent design activity. While this project 
focuses on churches with predominantly Black membership, pre-
vious sessions had made it clear that participants used a range of 
descriptors to label the racial and ethnic identity of their church, 
while others did not. We felt it necessary that participants defne 
terminology that we would use later in the focus group to engage 
in a dialogue about race and their Church communities. 
3.3.1 Afinity Diagram: The aim of the afnity diagram activity 
was to scafold a participant-led exploration of the intersection 
of race, church, health, and technology. Given the positionality 
of our research team and our focus on race, we felt it critical 
to use methods that disrupt the traditional power diferential be-
tween researcher and participant. Participants individually gener-
ated fve to six words or concepts related to each of the follow-
ing prompts: 1) How race relates to your church experience? 2) 
How your [focus group selected ethnic identity] church experi-
ence relates to health? 3) How your [focus group selected eth-
nic identity] church experience relates to technology? If asked 
to explain the prompts further, we provided two additional sec-
ondary prompts. 1) How your [focus group selected ethnic iden-
tity] church experience impacts/promotes/impedes health? 2) How 
does your [focus group selected ethnic identity] church experience impacts/promotes/impedes technology use? Post-its were then dis-
played on the wall for all participants to review. As a group, par-
ticipants then clustered post-its with similar concepts, and labeled 
each cluster. The resulting categories (formed from groupings) were 
used as inspiration for participant data collection. 
3.3.2 Introduction to Photovoice: A research assistant then pro-
vided a brief description of the photovoice method. Participants 
were instructed to take photos in their daily lives at any point in 
the subsequent three weeks. Participants were provided with a 
list of the categories created in the afnity diagram activity, and 
were asked to take at least one photo per category and to write a 
title and caption for each photograph. A research assistant then 
discussed ‘ground rules’ for photovoice [87], including maintain-
ing personal safety when taking photographs (e.g.,don’t take pho-
tographs while driving, don’t take photos of illicit activities) and 
asking for informed verbal consent before taking a photograph of 
another person. The frst session was two and half hours long. 
3.3.3 Between Sessions: Participants took photographs during the 
three weeks between sessions, and sent them, along with title and 
caption, through email or SMS to a member of the research team. 
Some participants elected to write longer paragraphs. Others sub-
mitted the image only. 
3.4 Session 4: Photovoice Discussion 
In the second session, we displayed all photographs grouped into 
their respective categories (Figure 1). The photos were not labeled 
by participant ID. If participants wished to identify themselves as 
the photographer they could during the focus group. Participants 
viewed only the photographs from their respective churches. As 
participants showed up to the focus group, they were invited to 
view all the photographs. After 15 minutes, we asked participants 
for their overall impressions of the photographs. For both church 
focus groups, these discussions lasted about 20 minutes. 
Next, Participants were instructed to pick one photograph that 
they felt was most important and most representative of some-
thing they would like us to know about their church community 
or church experience. After selecting one photo, participants com-
pleted a worksheet answering questions about the specifc photo. 
The following are the work sheet questions: 1) What important 
persons, places, or objects are in this photograph? 2) What moment 
did you capture? OR What do you want to say about it? 3) How 
does this photograph relate to your community’s lives? Why is it 
important? 4) Why does this strength, situation, or problem exist? 
5) What do we need to keep in mind when developing this health 
application? 
These questions were adapted from the SHOWeD photovoice 
methodology [39]. Wording was changed to refect project goals 
and aims. Participants were then assigned to participant dyads 
where they spent 25 minutes interviewing each other guided by the 
following prompts: 1) What picture (or pictures) represents some-
thing that is most important for us to know about your church? 
2) What photo(s) best shows what we need to keep in mind when 
we are developing the application? 3) What photos did you want 
to take but couldn’t? Dyads then reported back their fndings toCHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan O’Leary and Stowell, et al. 
Figure 1: Participants viewing their photos. 
the full group, including commonalities and diferences in the pho-
tos. Finally, participants provided feedback (refections) on their 
experiences with the photovoice method. The session lasted two 
hours. 
One participant from Church 2 was unable to attend the fo-
cus group session. As a result, they were invited to a one-on-one 
interview with one of the authors. During the interview, the partic-
ipant followed the same protocol. This participant also viewed the 
images taken by her church’s focus group members. Her overall 
impressions of her church’s photovoice images were recorded. 
For their participation in all four sessions, participants were 
compensated $24 per hour, for a total of $204 for the complete eight 
and a half hours. The Institutional Review Board at our university 
approved the study protocol. 
3.5 Analysis 
Interviews and focus groups were audio recorded and transcribed, 
resulting in a total of 14 hours and 20 minutes of audio fles and 
696 pages of transcription used. In line with Lopez et al., we con-
ducted a constructivist thematic analysis of focus group content 
guided by our research questions with the aim of identifying design 
insights [50]. In our analysis, we used elements of grounded the-
ory analysis, including initial coding, constant comparisons, axial 
and selective coding, and memo writing [19]. Using NVivo 12.5.0 
software, two researchers inductively coded transcripts separately, 
labeling emergent phenomena in the data to arrive at a codebook. 
Two researchers then independently applied the codebook to focus 
group and interview transcripts, 83 Photos (37 Church A. 46 Church 
B), and 9 worksheets. We met regularly during the analysis process 
to discuss discrepancies in the applications of the codes, reexamine 
the codebook, and refect on contradictory data. 
3.6 Participant Overview 
Ten church members participated in the frst photovoice introduc-
tion session, and photovoice follow-up session, 4 from Church A 
and 6 from Church B. One member of Church B could not attend 
the follow-up focus group, and instead participated in an interview. 
Demographics: All church-members self-identifed as Black. 7 
were female and 3 were male. Participant ages ranged from 33 to 
73. One participant had completed some high school, 1 completed 
a GED, 2 had some college, 3 had a BS/BA, and 3 had advanced 
degrees. 
Church Engagement: Participants from Church A have been mem-
bers for an average of 12 years (SD = 11.5, Range: 2-27), whereas 
participants from Church B have been members for an average of 4.5 years (SD = 2.4, Range: 2-7). They range from no involvement in 
any church afliated group or ministries to serving multiple roles 
in the church. These roles include attendee, ministry team leader, 
choir member, and trustee. 
4 FINDINGS 
Through photographs and facilitated discussion, church members 
from two churches provided nuanced characterizations of the racial 
and ethnic makeup of their respective church communities. These 
characterizations led to in-depth discussions regarding the intrica-
cies of community organization identity and temporal considera-
tions. In combination, these factors represent important insights 
into designing race-informed technology that not only responds to 
the temporal needs of community organizations, but also celebrates 
their strengths and augments their organizational capacity. 
4.1 Understanding CBO Identity 
4.1.1 Defining the Racial and Ethnic Identity of the CBO. Tradi-
tional models used to understand Black religious participation and 
expression have focused on a limited set of characteristics in defn-
ing the Black Church [79]. Instead, an assets-based approach dis-
pels monolithic perceptions of the Black Church, and examines 
the unique histories, legacies, and missions of these community 
organizations. Through our work with two diferent predominantly 
Black church communities within the same geographic region, we 
saw an opportunity to further explore distinctions between these 
organizations and the resulting implications for design. 
Throughout Sessions 1 & 2, participants used various terms to 
refer to their church communities. In some cases, this included 
racial and ethnic descriptors. To center race during our photovoice 
discussion, we felt it important that church members select termi-
nology that most represented their church community from their 
perspectives. Defning the racial and ethnic makeup of the church 
could not be accomplished with a single term, and instead, partici-
pants described the within group variability, and the multicultural 
makeup of their church communities. 
Participants hesitated to label the cultural makeup of their church 
for numerous reasons. P5 communicated his concern with labeling 
the church: 
“Well, how our race relates to your church experi-
ence, and. . . Uh, you know, that’s, you also have to 
think about...Who I am, and what I represent as a 
Black man. And how I perceive church and White 
expectations of Black church. You know, from the 
stereotypes...Like you have every, you have to dress 
a certain way to be accepted. You have to, um, act a 
certain way for acceptance.” 
P5 felt that his church lacked characteristics of a ‘stereotypical’ 
Black church that we, as White researchers, might expect, and 
that the label would lead to incorrect, and potentially harmful, 
assumptions about the organization. Participants then pointed to 
other nearby churches that they described as examples of “Black 
churches”. P1 assisted P5’s comparison, adding, “if I was describing 
[neighboring church] to somebody- I’d be like, “that’s a black church!", 
you know what I mean? [P5 & P3 laughter].” With further probing 
from researchers, participants enumerated various characteristicsExamining the Intersections of Race, Religion & Community Technologies: A Photovoice Study CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
that come with the label ‘the Black church’ such as a “fre and 
brimstone preacher” and certain formal attire. Participants tied this 
hesitancy around labeling their church to potential concerns of 
their broader community when interacting with academic research 
institutions. Given the history of abuse of BIPOC by researchers 
in the United States, as well as current practices of broad brush 
assumptions based on race (e.g., not all minority communities are 
low-income), participants reminded researchers that other church 
members may be wary of any technology system we designed. 
P7 characterized this sentiment, “people tend to lump us into a 
certain category.” Participants further expressed disillusionment 
with a corrective approach that emphasizes defcits within their 
community. As P1 stated, “a lot of time, organizations approach Black 
and Brown communities always with an under-served approach. Or 
low income, or low, you know what I mean.” P1 goes on to state that 
as long as, “[grants for ‘underserved’ groups] that’s what gets people 
to develop for the community, fne. But it can’t be all about that.” 
While P1 recognizes that the ‘underserved’ label may come from 
funding opportunities, she speaks to the importance of recognizing 
strengths and variation within each community. 
Members of Church B examined their own variability in so-
cioeconomic status, and characterized Church B as upper/middle 
class with members who occupy a range of professional positions 
(e.g., doctors, lawyers, therapists). P10 described the makeup of the 
church, 
“I think probably in the community we probably have 
a reputation of being sort of middle class or upper 
middle class, in general ...and also educated, given 
our pastor’s education. I think it recruits ...we seem 
to have a disproportionate number of people that are 
doctors or other professionals.” 
Church B is described by participants as resource-rich; however, 
members described feeling excluded. P6 stated, “[I’ve] felt like, oh 
maybe Church B isn’t for me because I don’t have my Master’s [de-
gree]. . . I don’t feel like I belong.” Throughout the session, P6 refected 
on difculties she had connecting to other members of the church 
when she frst joined. To address this challenge, the church had 
started smaller, more conveniently located Bible study groups to 
form closer relationships. Participants explored the benefts of these 
Bible study groups, “I thought that was a great way of getting to know 
each other and connecting with each other. So at least when you’re 
at church you, you know someone that you have a connection with.” 
However, these Bible study groups were short-lived due to limited 
capacity and high burden of coordination. Designing technology 
to connect church members would help achieve goals of fostering 
connections within the community. 
Due to the multicultural makeup of their churches, participants 
grappled with labelling their church community, and they did so 
through conversation with one another. Participants avoided a par-
ticular racial or ethnic label that made others in the community feel 
unwelcome, and asked each other about their response to various 
terms. For example, participants explored the nuances of the terms 
‘Black,’ a broad descriptor, and ‘African American,’ a descriptor that 
emphasizes the United States as a person’s country of birth [1]. In 
search of an inclusive term, participants asked P4, a participant who was born outside the United States, if she identifed as Black 
or African American. 
“P10: But if somebody said, oh, you go to an African 
American church, would you feel excluded or -
P4: No, not necessarily. No, not at all.” 
P6: Would you prefer us to refer to Church B as a 
Black church or an African American church? Based 
on all the Jamaicans– 
P4: I think it should be a Black church.” 
Throughout these conversations, it was clear that participants 
strongly believed that the label used to describe the racial and 
ethnic identity of their community should be broad enough to cele-
brate diversity within the Black community and promote inclusivity 
of people from other racial and ethnic backgrounds. P9 described 
the importance of inclusivity at Church B: 
“Even though they say it’s a Black church, it’s not all 
Black. We have a mixture. The ministers are Black. . . But 
we welcome everybody. It’s an open-arm church. The 
community is welcome. Strangers are welcome. And 
I think that’s one of the core things about the church. 
That we love everybody. And it’s up to you.” 
Engaging new members is exceedingly important to both 
churches. 
By explicitly focusing on race, members were able to share spe-
cifc technology requirements and design ideas. In a previous focus 
group session, participants were introduced to a variety of technolo-
gies (e.g., smart speakers, embodied conversational agents, instant 
messaging technologies, smart watches) as potential interaction 
modalities for the mHealth application. During the photovoice 
session, participants emphasized the importance of including rep-
resentations of the cultural diversity of their church. P8 afrmed, “I 
should be hearing diferent voices and accents, I also want to see dif-
ferent people of color, White people. ” Participants further stated that 
genuine representations of their multicultural churches refected in 
the mHealth application would create an atmosphere of acceptance 
much like that of their churches. It was important for participants 
to see themselves and their values within the mHealth application. 
Participants looked for demonstrations honoring the racial and 
ethnic identities of their church community. 
During the focus group, church members from each community 
came to a consensus. In Church A, participants agreed that the label 
“predominantly Black Church” was authentic and representative 
of their church community’s diversity, while Church B chose to 
label their community as a “Multicultural Church seated in the 
African American tradition.” At Church B, participants examined 
the multifaceted racial and ethnic identities within their church 
communities and used terminology to both refect their diversity 
and represent their history. 
“P7: We have other races there besides Caribbean, 
we have West Indian and all the other. We also have 
Spanish and Chinese. 
P8: Church [B] is a multicultural church seated in the 
African American tradition. 
P6: Yeah, let’s leave it like that. She’s the educator 
here! 
P7: I will go with that one.CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan O’Leary and Stowell, et al. 
P6: Very eloquently put. 
P7: I think that’s perfect.” 
Both groups favored the term Black when describing the racial 
identity of most of the church members. 
In defning the racial and ethnic makeup of the congregation, 
church members engaged researchers in a much deeper conversa-
tion, which included understanding the history of the institution. 
Research on the management of social identity suggests labels are 
symbolic devices used to supplement surface level attributes and 
to communicate social identity [31]. In this case, the Black church 
is a symbol which embodies a list of attributes regarding the or-
ganization’s identity; however, as participants suggest, labels may 
help establish identity and communicate history, but are merely a 
placeholder for a more detailed and rich set of qualities based on 
autobiographical information. In subsequent sections, we provide 
a detailed history of both church communities, their current tech-
nology use, and changes to their immediate circumstances. Having 
these conversations was foundationally important for our work. 
At a practical level, to work with communities, you have to un-
derstand how to refer to them. Language and words are the core 
to establishing rapport and facilitating efective communication 
between the research team and participants. Beyond the words 
themselves, these discussions helped us to better understand how 
community members frame their racial identity as an organization. 
This exercise demonstrated nuances between organizations, as our 
members did not select the same terminology. These perspectives 
on identity have direct implications for their expectations from 
technology, such as the expectation that these technologies refect 
the diversity of the communities. 
4.1.2 Legacy of Church A. When working with CBOs, sociotech-
nologists should understand the history of the organization as part 
of their exploratory analysis. This process not only assists in build-
ing rapport between researchers and community members [12], but 
it further defnes current perspectives and goals of the organization. 
As we will demonstrate, understanding the past helps us design 
technology that leverages the assets of the organization and refects 
the current attitudes and beliefs of users. In addition, a temporal 
approach to studying the community’s values, adaptations to im-
mediate circumstances, and future goals creates opportunities to 
design technologies aligned with the organization’s future. 
Church A is an American Baptist Church. Members describe 
Church A as “traditional ”, wherein participants defne traditional as 
slow adaptation to changes in how church business is conducted. In 
discussing how they would describe their church to others, partici-
pants from Church A felt strongly that their historic church would 
be well known to others in their state. In talking about their church 
to local friends or colleagues, they would see no need to label the 
racial and ethnic make-up of the community. P1 explained, “I would 
just kind of assume if they’re from [State] they at least have heard 
of it.” However when describing her church to friends from out of 
state, P1 provided additional context, “it’s like one of the frst Black 
churches in [the State].” P1 demonstrated how the history of the 
church, as an icon of the Black community, is still relevant to its 
current identity. 
Inside the walls of the church, members enjoy the benefts of 
preservation eforts that have maintained their historic worship 
Figure 2: Priestly Mission: Functions Specifcally for Mem-
bers. 
hall. Fewer than fve pastors have led this church community in its 
history, creating a continuity in leadership. The current pastor led 
the church for over 40 years. P3 described the powerful infuence 
the current pastor has: 
“Well, I’ll say again, people follow the pastor’s [lead]. 
We don’t really have that young people mentality, and 
I’m big on stuf like that [technology], but I look at 
what we do [have] and then. . . what a lot of churches 
have...Anyway, we can use a lot more of that, that 
we don’t do. A LOT more of it.” 
Participants routinely stated that the Pastor’s length of service, his 
emphasis on tradition, the conventional practices of their church, 
and the aging congregation all simultaneously impact the tradi-
tional mindset and feel of Church A. When asking participants to 
describe the various ministries that serve current church members, 
otherwise known as ‘inreach’ ministries, we were impressed by the 
number. In response to our surprise one member exclaimed, “well, 
the church has been there for [200+] years,” further emphasizing the 
infuence of history and longevity on church culture. This focus on 
‘inreach’ is indicative of Church A’s priestly function (e.g., defned 
by activities to support the spiritual growth and development of 
the church members directly). The mission statement of Church 
A emphasizes the importance of maintaining the spiritual life of 
members through Scripture and church worship in the Black re-
ligious tradition. In selecting a photo that depicted an important 
aspect of his church experience (Figure 2), P3 described, “During this 
meeting seniors meet to pray and discuss everyday concerns.” Church 
A focuses on nurturing the spiritual growth of their congregation 
by engaging members in various events and worship activities; 
however as Barnes et al. suggest, churches with an emphasis on 
church member spiritual growth are just as likely as churches with 
a social justice focus to ofer instrumental support when serving 
the broader community [2]. In the case of Church A, participants 
spoke not only to the importance of bringing new people into the 
church in order to share in religious expression (e.g., community 
dinners, Bible study, and worship activities), but also in providing 
tangible support including but not limited to back to school drives, 
clothing drives, and food drives.Examining the Intersections of Race, Religion & Community Technologies: A Photovoice Study CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
Figure 3: Technology Use in the Churches. A) Church A - rare use of screen. B) Church B. 
4.1.3 Technology Use in Church A. Church A focus group mem-
bers emphasized the implications of how church legacy inhibits the 
integration of technology within the walls of the church. Technolo-
gies commonly found in some sanctuary halls are nonexistent in 
Church A [93]. There are no digital displays, and instead of a video 
live stream, Church A opted to air their service using radio. This 
provides access to services for those who cannot attend, while min-
imizing technologies in the sanctuary. The only display technology 
used on the church campus is an overhead projector system (Figure 
3). This system is used exclusively for Bible study, and is located 
in a newer, adjoining building not bound by the same historical 
preservation eforts. 
During worship, church members opt for physical Bibles and 
Hymnals. Use of the Bible application during services is met with 
mixed reactions. P1 explained, “people may think you’re doing some-
thing else [on your smartphone]. . . ” P5 demonstrates how community 
norms discourage technology use, “see, and then you’re like [using 
Bible app]. . . Oh, but they’re just like, “What are they really doing? 
they should be listening to this pastor instead of being on their phones. 
People think they’re on their. . . playing games and texting.” P5 further 
explained a drawback of the Bible app from his point of view,“if a 
person cannot pick up a hard copy of the Bible and go straight to scrip-
ture, then they don’t really know the Bible.” Ability to locate Scripture 
within the Bible serves as a public demonstration of familiarity with 
the Bible and its teachings. Such prowess is not only a highly valued 
skill within the community, but a social expectation that members 
have of both themselves and others. Despite this expectation, mul-
tiple participants reported using electronic Bible applications and 
faith applications (e.g., electronic devotionals) when privately prac-
ticing their faith in other locations (e.g., home, work, school). P1 
described how using the Bible app positively impacted her own 
Bible study practices: 
“I can go to the Bible app, like, Oh, what was that 
verse? Like I don’t have to be like [gestures with 
hands frantically fipping through the entire Bible]. 
You know, in the Bible,. . . I-, to be honest, I don’t know 
it from front to back. Like it would take me a really 
long time to fnd.” Bible apps ease the burden of locating Scripture, thus allowing 
users to practice their faith even when short on time. This sits in 
tension with values and spiritual expectations of others within the 
community, and thus has implications for designing technology 
that looks to ameliorate such tensions. 
Outside of the physical Church, leaders communicate with mem-
bers largely by phone. P3 stated, “A lot of our people don’t even have 
email, okay? ” At the start of our work, Church A had a public facing 
website and Facebook group; however, some of the participants 
were notably surprised to fnd this out, exclaiming, “There’s a web-
site?! ” Other members of the focus group were aware of the website 
to the extent that information had not been updated in over a year. 
When asked how people learn about events, P2 responded: 
“I think it’s a lot of word of mouth. If you’re in the 
church, there’s a section in the book [church bulletin] 
that has all the events going on. They do have a Face-
book page. It gets a little bit of trafc. Yeah, they don’t 
really update it as much as they should, as frequently 
as they should.” 
Perhaps most indicative of participant perceptions of technology 
in Church A is that photographs representing the category ‘Tech-
nology Used’ did not depict technology used within the Church. 
Instead, participants took photographs of their personal technolo-
gies. In lieu of a photo, P3 submitted a paragraph describing his 
frustration with the lack of current technology practices within the 
church. Participants viewed technology use as “modernizing,” and 
as a way to reach new members. P1 described being active in the 
church she grew up in, and partly attributed this to a smartphone 
app that the church used to deliver church-related content (e..g, 
calendar of events, recorded sermons). By sharing the app with 
others, P1 introduced other participants to possible functions tech-
nology could provide to members. After looking through the app, 
P5 shared: 
“It’s a very modern thing, they, the, the screen app 
blew me away. Everything with screen app and all 
that stuf. So the technology was kind of a forefront. 
[Church A] is not there yet, it’s very traditional. ICHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan O’Leary and Stowell, et al. 
would think to [Church A] as a traditional Black, his-
torical Black church. You know, with the, with some 
of the, some of the, rules and uh, mission statements. 
Just they kept, keeping things traditional” 
In describing her photograph (Figure 4), P1 further explored the 
types of “traditional ” thinking could constrain technology imple-
mentation: 
“this reminds me of old school or traditional ideals 
[points to sign in Figure 4] that are stuck in Black 
or Brown communities. This type of ideology [Sign 
reads: Jesus Christ is Lord of All. And he’s coming 
back any minute. Get ready.] could be a hindrance to 
introducing new technology. Some people will be ex-
cited. Some people will view technology as the devil.” 
For P1, the tone and message of the sign was judgemental and 
threatening. Her sentiment demonstrates how mindsets towards 
technology can vary within any CBO. In the case of Church A, the 
participant felt that congregants would react to technology in a vari-
ety of ways, ranging from enthusiasm to judgement and skepticism. 
Understanding how ideologies may vary within an organization is 
crucial when implementing technology interventions. 
Our participants were enthusiastic about the potential for future 
technology integration within their Church; however, our fndings 
illuminate that Church A’s incorporation of technology has been 
slow, and in some cases even deliberately restricted. Members of the 
Church emphasize that the goal of engaging new younger members 
sits in tension with current Church A technology practices in part 
to preserve the worship hall of Church A as a historic landmark 
within the Black community. As P3 stated, “ We move [progress], 
with the pastor who’s somewhat senior. . . you know what I mean? We, 
we, we, we just need. . . We need someone to take that, what exists in 
the realm of Facebook, and run with it.” While P3 used Facebook as 
an example, the sentiment of adding contemporary technology to 
enhance worship and church services was expressed as a goal of 
our focus group participants. We will now describe the legacy and 
technology use of Church B to further our discussion. 
Figure 4: Old World Thinking. 4.1.4 Legacy of Church B. In contrast, Church B was established 
less than 40 years ago and has grown considerably. Church B is 
an African-Methodist Episcopal (AME) church, a denomination 
with a rich history of engagement in social and political action. 
Church B is led by two co-pastors. When they founded Church 
B, they incorporated technology rapidly. Established in the homes 
of the pastors, the church grew from just a few members to over 
500 and now ofers two services per Sunday to accommodate their 
membership. Participants describe the arc of this growth as starting 
from a table, to gymnasium, to auditorium, with its latest growth 
culminating in the transformation of the church campus through 
the addition of a school. In its most recent construction, the worship 
hall of Church B included specifcations for technology (Figure 3B). 
The mission statement of Church B describes collaborations with 
public, nonproft educational, community, governmental, and inter-
faith partners to initiate programs that serve thousands of people 
both locally and worldwide. While Church B certainly celebrates 
Scripture and nurtures the spiritual growth of its members, the mis-
sion statement clearly indicates Church B’s focus on outreach and 
social justice. Indeed, the AME church was born out of a response to 
racial injustice; this Protestant denomination was founded by Black 
churchgoers in 1787 in response to the racial discrimination they 
were subjected to (e.g., restrictions in where they were allowed to 
pray in church) [22]. In the civil war and reconstruction era, AME 
leaders ministered to freed Black slaves and welcomed them into 
the denomination. This led to the largest period of denominational 
growth [17]. The mission statement of the AME church today, “is 
to minister to the social, spiritual, and physical development of all 
people” [16]. In keeping with this denominational tradition, Church 
B’s conceptualization of community is not constrained to a particu-
lar neighborhood, town, or even country. P8 passionately described 
her church’s mission to serve all people by saying: 
“I appreciate the fact that they both said that [Church 
B] has a connection to the community. It’s not just 
about...ministry at [Church B] is not just about the 
members of the [Church B] congregation. It’s about 
how do we extend ourselves to heal and to help people 
outside of our immediate faith community? How do 
we serve as a witness to other people for what faith 
and belief in God and trust in God should be about? 
How do we help people overseas who are looking to 
build ministry and connect people to God. It’s all of 
those things I think, that makes it kinda special.” 
Church B and its members are committed to addressing societal 
issues through community engagement and partnership with other 
social-justice oriented organizations. P7 explained, “I think social 
action and social justice is a big part of our identity as a church. ” 
P10 took this another step further, when describing one of her 
photographs (Figure 5): 
“This photograph is important because social justice 
is a signifcant part of our responsibility and our rep-
utation at Church B. [The photo] also emphasizes the 
importance of collaboration and connection to other 
congregations. The group exists to better understand 
the needs of the community.”Examining the Intersections of Race, Religion & Community Technologies: A Photovoice Study CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
Figure 5: Prophetic Mission: Interfaith Meeting for Social 
Justice. 
Indeed, this photograph (Figure 5) depicts one of many active 
ministries at Church B that address various issues of social justice. 
Of note, these ministries are sustained entirely by the eforts of 
volunteers. When asked directly how technology could augment 
their Church mission, Church B participants were interested in 
using technology to support the work of these ministries. P10 asked 
our team, “How can the [mHealth] app improve access or identify gaps 
in potential healthcare availability? ” P10 felt that the application 
should expand current social justice eforts of the ministries by 
assisting in the collection of data on racial health inequities in the 
broader community. Additionally, participants saw potential for 
technologies to support the current functions of church member 
volunteers. P6 revealed: 
“you have to have people that are dedicated enough 
to it that, that’s like almost like a part-time job in 
order to keep it going. And um sometimes when that 
happens, people get overburdened and overtaxed and 
burnt out. And um, which is unfortunate but then like 
people don’t wanna do, once they other folks getting 
burned out- they’re like, that’s not gonna be me.” 
Given the denominational mission of social justice work present 
within Church B, technologies should be designed to relieve vol-
unteer burden while simultaneously augmenting the institution’s 
organizational mission and capacity. 
4.1.5 Technology Use in Church B. During the introduction to 
photovoice session, Church B created two technology categories 
‘Technology Integration’ and ‘Technology Outreach.’ They returned to our follow up session with many images of types of technology 
that their church fully embraced. 
Worship Technology. In contrast to Church A, Church B uses a 
number of technologies during church services. These technologies 
include digital displays to project scripture, worship lyrics, and 
multimedia auxiliary materials such as images or video to support 
the message of the sermon. P10 explained, “sometimes whoever is 
preaching will, most especially our pastor, will integrate something 
from a modern video, music video or a movie or something else and you 
can project that on the screen which enhances the sermon. ” To increase 
engagement and appeal to younger audiences, Church B uses a 
pre-recorded cartoonish digital avatar to deliver announcements 
(Figure 3 Bottom). Unlike Church A, personal use technology is 
widely accepted during worship. P8 stated, “I use the Bible app, yeah. 
Everybody seem to go on their phone on Sunday’s now. You see the 
phones, and iPads coming up on Sunday morning.” It is assumed that 
church members on their personal devices, including both phones 
and tablets, are using the Bible app in coordination with service. 
Church members who are unable to attend a church due to ill-
ness or disability can view a livestream of the sermon on the church 
website. While this option increases access to the service, partic-
ipants quickly point out that the option to view from home may 
reduce the number of people who attend in person. P8 explained: 
“[Points to photograph of greeting during Worship. 
Figure 6 Left] This one kind of speaks to what can 
happen...what happens when you are in fellowship 
together. And this [Points to photograph of camera 
used to capture services. Figure 6 Right] facilitates, 
um, people having access to worship but not fellow-
ship.” 
These juxtaposing images demonstrate the importance of relation-
ship building to church members, and that simply streaming church 
services does not address that core relational value. P8 further ex-
plains the importance of fellowship: 
“It’s when you get out and interact with others that 
you begin to get a sense for where there are areas 
where you need to grow and, and develop. And it’s 
in fellowship with others who care for you that you 
actually do begin to grow and develop. It’s not simply 
that they point out how you might develop. How 
you might grow is that they facilitate and help your 
[spiritual] growth and [spiritual] development.” 
Only six of the 83 photographs collected during photovoice were 
of challenges within their communities. Whereas 34 illustrated var-
ious facets of in-person interactions and fellowship. Participants 
spoke of the power of people and the desire for further connec-
tion. Participants from both Church A and B mention wanting 
opportunities to deepen social connectedness and bridge cultural 
boundaries, in a way recognizing the necessity of these connections 
in increasing social capital. 
Communication and Coordination of Events. Church B’s web-
site includes an updated calendar of events, as well as a number of 
church-wide announcements (e.g., prayer concerns, birth announce-
ments, and pastor messages). In addition, Church B uses various 
social network platforms such as Facebook, Instagram, and TwitterCHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan O’Leary and Stowell, et al. 
Figure 6: Church B - Left) Fellowship Right) Livestreaming 
the sermon. 
to communicate with current church members. Use of public fac-
ing technologies supports Church B’s social justice orientation by 
extending their reach to members outside of the organization. Mem-
bers of these ministries coordinate events and communicate using 
platforms such as Slack and YouTube. P7 described the numerous 
ways the dance ministry used technology: 
“They post YouTube videos. They post instructional 
videos. They post, um, inspirational words, scriptures. 
Like when we’re going to minister on a particular 
Sunday, you don’t have time to rehearse collectively, 
So they will create a video and send it out so that we 
can do it at home. When I say ministering, I mean like 
dancing. So the movements along with the instruction 
behind it.” 
P7 further described how prayer ministry used their Slack chan-
nel, “Putting up our prayer requests, that’s [Slack] a pretty big hub 
for prayer group.” Even with these communication technologies, 
participants from Church B point to the potential to improve com-
munication in their church. This includes coordination between 
the various ministries, communication about ongoing activities of 
ministries, and church bulletin emails going to spam. 
Technology-hosted activities. Prior to the Covid-19 pandemic, the 
only interactive and synchronous activity that Church B hosted 
virtually were regular evening and early morning conference calls 
colloquially known as ‘prayer lines.’ Such calls were coordinated 
to facilitate group prayer and meditation. These oferings create 
opportunities for group activities that otherwise would be missed 
if limited to events that occur only in person. 
4.1.6 Summary of Technology for Church A & B. Church A was 
founded nearly two centuries before Church B. Our fndings show 
how considerations for types of technology integrated within Church 
A must honor its historical signifcance and legacy, as well its at-
tempts to grow its membership. In contrast, Church B has a shorter 
history and more modern building with a focus on rapid technol-
ogy integration, as well as plans to increase technology capacity 
to improve the quality of broadcasted services. Here we see the importance of resisting defcit-based models of technological liter-
acy in predominantly Black communities and instead encourage 
understanding the organization’s positionality [8]. Diferences in 
institutional cultural and political capital impacts not only how 
Church A uses fnancial resources (e.g., money for preservation 
eforts versus technology integration in the worship hall)—it also 
impacts the normative digital practices of church members. We may 
have otherwise wrongly assumed that technological literacy causes 
these diferences in digital practices when comparing both churches. 
Integration of personal technology into services at Church B (e.g., 
Bible apps) mirrors personal technology use of many of its church 
members when outside the church, whereas in Church A, “tradition” 
and social expectations cause younger members from our focus 
group to limit technology use during worship. 
4.2 Adapting to Societal Forces and Present 
Challenges 
Understanding the origins of both CBOs contextualizes how the 
organizations adapt to environmental factors and thus gives insight 
into the current needs. In the case of Church A, the congregation 
has shifted from the majority of members living locally, to most 
members commuting to the organization by car for Sunday worship. 
This is partially due to changes in the neighborhood, including 
changes caused by our own university. P5 explained: 
“I- in the past I would consider [Church A] a Black 
church, ’cause I lived in the neighborhood for 30 years 
- before I moved. But now since the. . . the. . . the neigh-
borhood, the neighborhood has re-gentrifed I would 
just call it a community church.” 
P5 identifed these shifts as gentrifcation due to a predominantly 
White student population that had since moved into the neighbor-
hood. P5 explained: 
“And that’s why I think, when you said, “What is a 
Black church", because the communities changed so 
much-.. I don’t think that should be the headliner, if 
they’re going to grow the church- because the neigh-
borhoods changin- so you have to be inclusive. You 
have to think, you know who, that’s who will come 
to your church, is mostly the neighborhoods. . . history 
came from, like you said, one of the frst Black churches 
in [State], but you know it’s changed, you know, it’s 
all. . . I would think to be all inclusive you kind of erase 
that.” 
This further demonstrates the tensions experienced by church mem-
bers responding to not only current changes from within the local 
community, but also a desire to honor the legacy of the church. This 
tension impacts the ways in which the organization identifes itself. 
Church A’s history as a longstanding CBO within a place defned 
neighborhood demonstrates the potential challenges organizations 
may face adapting to external societal forces. 
Members of Church A explored further changes to local neigh-
borhood composition, including an infux of immigrant Latinx com-
munity members. Several members noted the desire to serve the 
local Latinx community by inviting them into church. P3 expressed 
this aspiration when he stated, “I would hope that we would focusExamining the Intersections of Race, Religion & Community Technologies: A Photovoice Study CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
Table 1: Summarizing Technology Use in Church A and Church B 
Church A Church B 
During Church Service No Digital Displays in sanctuary Digital Displays in sanctuary - multimedia content 
(e.g., videos, pre-recorded announcements with 
avatar, worship lyrics, images) 
Personal Devices In Sanctuary Limited use Pervasive Use 
Private Worship outside of Sanctuary Bible App Bible App; Daily Bread; Daily Devotionals 
Communication between Church Members Primarily Phone Calls E-mail; Slack; Facebook; Twitter; Church Website 
Church Service Broadcast Synchronous Radio Streams Synchronous Live Streams 
more on being a predominantly minority church, that’s uh, that’s 
predominantly Black. . . we’ve got Spanish people in the area who, 
who can’t come in the church and have a discussion with anybody.” 
P3 further in conversation defned a minority church as a church 
with both Latinx and Black community members. P5 added that 
the religious services and experience of worship are not limited 
to a single racial identity at Church A. P5 stated, “I mean, it’s pre-
dominantly Black. So it speaks to that, but that doesn’t mean that it 
has to be exclusive to the Black person, or Black community-” During 
the afnity diagram, participants clarifed that “speaking’ to the 
Black experience was important with regard to matters of health, 
and emphasizing Black history. In addition, music was identifed 
as another key component of their experience of worship, and one 
that they associated with a Black church. 
Church A participants worried about community engagement 
due to language barriers. P3 expressed frustration with the lack 
of translation services available to those who live locally to the 
church community, impacting their ability to come to worship at 
the church. P3 stated, “we need someone on a pulpit, who basically 
will embrace it [speaking spanish]. We have a lot of diferent ministers 
but we have, we have no Hispanic ministers. Okay? ” This attitude 
towards inclusion extended to the design of the application. When 
describing their church community, the boundaries of community 
extend beyond the walls of the church and into the surrounding 
area. They expressed similar expectations for who would be able to 
access the mHealth app. 
While Church A navigated challenges associated with changes in 
neighborhood composition, Church B struggled with membership 
fuidity due to annual and cyclical membership changes and rapid 
growth of the community. P4 described, 
“Because what’s happening is, the church has grown 
tremendously over the years. And there’s been a lot 
of new faces. And you see people coming and going. 
And part of the congregation is very fuid. You know, 
people will come because they’re here, you know, and 
they’re attached to a school or university or some-
thing. So they do their studies so they’re at [Church 
B]. Someone say come to [Church B], so they come. 
And they’re here for awhile, then they’re gone.” 
Members agreed that shifts in community membership, coupled 
with rapid growth, can lead to a disjointed sense of connection in 
their community. 
Despite Church B’s extensive use of communication technology, 
participants stated that it was easy for people to “fall through the cracks.” Even with the proliferation of communication technology 
within Church B, members identifed communication as one of 
their church’s challenges. Participants from Church B included 
photographs of a meeting dedicated to exploring how to improve 
communication and foster a sense of community. P6 further ex-
plored the problem: 
“I’ve been in the church since 2002. I’m, I’m not a 
cliquey person. I’m, I’m not a, I’m not a joiner, you 
know. But there is a lot, there’s a lot of cliques in the 
church, and I think some people sort of feel alien-
ated, because they don’t feel that- They’re connected. 
There are diferent cultures in our church that tend 
to hang out with the culture of, um, their parents or 
of themselves. And, um, I think that bothers some 
people.” 
P4 further expressed, “it’s not a congregation that’s inclusive, and 
I think, I think they’re trying to change that. I think it’s gonna be a 
uphill battle, but at least they’re aware of it and making an efort 
to do something about it.” Participants identifed this issue as one 
that the technology system could solve by connecting people in the 
church community using member identifed commonalities (e.g., 
style of prayer, age). 
5 DISCUSSION 
Despite calls from the CHI community to address race in HCI [ 61, 
75], we found limited options for paper keywords when uploading 
this paper into the conference submission system. For example, 
‘race’ was not a keyword option. Similarly problematic, ‘faith’ and 
‘religion’ were also missing. Inadvertent acts such as this further 
demonstrate the work our community needs to do to center race, 
religion, and faith as core areas of study in HCI. 
Upon beginning the project, we acknowledged the history of 
exploitation and abuse of communities, especially communities of 
color, by academic research institutions [28]. Indeed, the success 
of a research project is often measured in “knowledge gained” and 
technology created, with far less emphasis on participant experi-
ence in the process or beneft to the community [26]. Mistrust in 
the research process is even more prescient when designing tech-
nology systems. Recent works have enumerated the many ways 
in which technologies can reinforce racial bias and deepen social 
inequity [5]. “Color-blind” systems and systems developed with 
the intention of helping reduce disparities in healthcare, the legal 
system, and education have been found to unintentionally rein-
force racism and discriminatory practices [5]. Understanding theseCHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan O’Leary and Stowell, et al. 
nuances helps to address community member concerns throughout 
the project. Given this context, we need ways of centering race in 
community-engaged HCI. 
We have embraced the call to engage critically with race when 
conducting research and when developing technology [61], and 
the call for the inclusion of faith organizations in community in-
formatics inquiry [45]. First, we ofer a refection on our process in 
engaging with race in community-engaged design. We then present 
design opportunities to support current missions and future goals 
among churches with predominantly Black membership. 
5.1 Refections on Community-Engaged 
methods for HCI 
5.1.1 Promote community self-identification. The frst and second 
author began the photovoice introduction session explicitly ac-
knowledging their outsider status in terms of both church member-
ship and racial identity. We emphasized that our aim in describing 
the racial identity of their church was to avoid mischaracterizing 
their community. In the end, we found that the term “Black Church”, 
while historically meaningful, did not feel totally accurate to our 
participants. In re-labeling their communities, there was a much 
richer conversation to be had about the implications of history, 
and future-oriented missions to promote inclusivity within their 
communities. Both history and future missions impact not only 
the label by which church members refer to their communities, but 
also technology design overall. 
Recommendation: We encourage researchers working with com-
munities, especially communities that are already racially labeled, 
to reject the urge to characterize the community without their 
input. Our fndings emphasize the importance of community self-
identifcation. 
5.1.2 Discuss race earlier in the research process. Establishing trust 
and building rapport between members of the research team and 
stakeholders in the community is essential to creating sustainable 
interventions that leverage community resources [12, 44, 65, 82]. 
From our very frst interactions with our partner organization, com-
munity liaisons, and potential participants, we felded questions 
about personal data use, ownership of resulting technology, and 
goals of the mHealth application. We informally gauged rapport 
with participants as they began to ask questions of us, including 
questions about our own religious background and church experi-
ences. Prior to conducting the photovoice sessions, we had worked 
with participants directly for seven months building trust and rap-
port before engaging with race directly. While the topic of race had 
come up in previous focus groups, it had not been the explicit focus 
of our discussions. On one hand, having an already established 
rapport to discuss a sensitive topic helped participants feel more 
comfortable and talk more openly; however, we acknowledge that 
having this conversation sooner could potentially have benefted 
the project overall. Thus, as a community, we must identify addi-
tional methods for authentically addressing race at various stages 
of the research process. 
Recommendation: Researchers should critically refect on ways to 
approach the discussion of race earlier when conducting community-
engaged work. For example, we encourage further design work that 
focuses on creating innovative methods to spur conversations about race at various stages of the user-centered design process. Such 
methods and accompanying tool kits would catalyze and make 
race-focused conversations more commonplace in HCI. 
Recommendation: Research teams should consider how to adapt 
their methods to provide participants with the opportunity to dis-
cuss potentially sensitive topics (e.g., the intersection of race and 
their church experience) with another BIPOC and in a variety of 
ways. In our work, we adapted the photovoice method by engaging 
participants in full group discussion, participant pair discussion, 
and written communication (e.g., worksheets). Including commu-
nity liaisons as co-facilitators during such design workshops may 
be especially benefcial. 
Recommendation: In addition, research teams should consider 
volunteering with the community organization outside of their 
research capacity. Pei & Nardi volunteered to teach 42 two hours of 
English classes at a Literacy Center, while simultaneously engaging 
participants in their assets-based work [65]. Similarly, Irani et al. 
volunteered at a refugee resettlement non-proft organization prior 
to engaging clients served in the research process [41]. Volunteer-
ing signals a greater commitment to the community organization, 
provides an opportunity to learn more about the organization, and 
can aid in building rapport. 
5.1.3 Take an assets-based approach to community-engaged re-
search. We selected a well-established photo-elicitation method 
proven to be benefcial as a tool in identifying strengths and as-
sets in community-engaged projects. Indeed, of 83 photos that 
participants contributed, 63 depicted community strengths (e.g., so-
cial connectedness, connections to other faith-based organizations, 
church-led events, access to professional resources). 
Recommendation: Our fndings echo those of recent community-
engaged HCI [15], and call for a focus on leveraging community 
assets by incorporating an assets-based approach to design [65]. 
5.1.4 Choose flexible methods that promote assets-identification. 
Photovoice is highly adaptable to the community context, and in-
structions for photovoice can be fexible depending on the goal of 
the project [39]. In their work with trafcking survivors, Guatam, 
et al. treated all photos as communal to reduce the burden on in-
dividuals to speak about sensitive topics [29]. Similarly, Fox & Le 
Dantec coupled a photo-elicitation method with a workshop in 
which cameras were assembled from a kit [26]. Within the context 
of our project, we adapted the method in a few ways. First, we 
purposefully kept our prompts fexible and encouraged participants 
to use the prompts however they interpreted them. For example, 
two participants interpreted “church community” as extending be-
yond their home church, and submitted photos of these additional 
churches as a strength of their community. These photos repre-
sented an interconnectedness between local church resources, an 
asset that we otherwise may have missed. 
Recommendation: When conducting assets-based community-
engaged research provide participants with open-ended and un-
structured methods. 
5.1.5 Photovoice method reflections: choose photographic technol-
ogy commensurate with project goals. For our photovoice activity, 
participants used their smartphones for data collection. As a re-
sult, participants could edit and curate their photographs beyondExamining the Intersections of Race, Religion & Community Technologies: A Photovoice Study CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
what would be possible with the traditional cameras often used in 
this method. We believe this is a beneft, as it increases participant 
control over their data collection. Participants submitted photos, 
screenshots, videos, photos directly from the church website, and 
historical photographs reaching back up to 15 years. For some re-
search questions, a set time frame or particular format may be 
preferable; however, we appreciated the temporal approach partici-
pants took with their data collection. Submission of photographs 
outside of the present day provided us with more robust informa-
tion regarding their church communities, including the impact of 
signifcant past events and church members. 
Recommendation: Researchers should consider what range of 
time is preferable for their project and choose a method accord-
ingly. If interested in uncurated photographs of the present day, 
researchers should provide participants with flm cameras. All of 
our participants had access to a smartphone. As a result, they were 
able to take screenshots, photos of physical photographs, and sub-
mit photos already in their digital camera roll. Thus, if researchers 
are interested in collecting photographs from a range of time out-
side of the photovoice data collection period, smartphones equipped 
with cameras would be an appropriate choice. 
5.1.6 Photovoice method reflections: consider a pre-training pho-
tovoice session. At the end of the fnal photovoice session, we asked 
participants to refect on their experiences with the photovoice 
method. Participants endorsed the activity, and enjoyed discussing 
diferences and similarities between their photographs with other 
members from their church. Having gained familiarity with the re-
search method, participants remarked that they wished they could 
perform the activity again, and ended our session brainstorming 
additional photographs that would be helpful in describing their 
church experience. 
Recommendation: If possible, conduct a pre-training session to 
help participants gain familiarity with the entire photovoice pro-
cess prior to the larger photovoice activity. In their work, commu-
nity historians, Fox & Le Dantec reframed their pre-training as 
a camera-building workshop activity that immediately benefted 
community members [26]. All of our participants had access to 
a smartphone and most were comfortable taking photos, videos, 
screenshots, and submitting photos from their digital camera roll; 
however, researchers should consider training participants on these 
methods. Doing so would ensure that participants begin the pho-
tovoice project with baseline comfort with and knowledge of the 
multitude of ways that they could use the technology. Thus, A pre-
training session could facilitate skill development in both photogra-
phy and narrative storytelling, and enhance participant experiences 
of the session. 
5.1.7 Photovoice method reflections: reduce participant burden. In 
our efort to anchor the photovoice sessions, we encouraged partic-
ipants to take photographs of all the categories that were generated 
(8 categories for Church A; 9 categories for Church B). Some par-
ticipants reported that they would have preferred fewer categories. 
We realize that this approach may have made the design activity 
less democratized by potentially burdening some participants. 
Recommendation: In future work, researchers should consider 
how to reduce participant burdens, including that of data collection 
and of storytelling. To reduce the burden of data collection, we could have emphasized that not all categories or prompts must be 
captured, limited the number of categories created, or spread out 
categories over multiple sessions. To reduce the burden of story-
telling on an individual, Gautam et al. asked participants to annotate 
their photo submissions as a group during a design workshop [29]. 
Alternatively, with improved technological capacity, researchers 
could use an online platform for group photo submission. Doing so 
could provide fexibility by encouraging full photographic represen-
tation of all categories while simultaneously decreasing the number 
of categories each individual would have to contribute. Participants 
could post their photo submissions in real-time for other group 
members to see, respond to, and curate prior to an in-person focus 
group. 
5.2 Church Missions & Future Trajectories 
5.2.1 Identity v. Inclusion. In our work, we focus on the develop-
ment of an mHealth technology system for Black Christian commu-
nities; however, there are many other types of faith communities, 
including diferent denominational practices, congregations, and 
faith-based organizations. We contribute to HCI research on tech-
nospiritual design and on race by examining the intersection of 
these two domains of inquiry. Specifcally, our work represents a 
case study of the nuances inherent in designing for the intersec-
tional identities of race and religion. Our larger research project 
focuses on two churches with predominantly Black membership 
located in the same major city and within the same partner organiza-
tion, and yet we see incredible diversity in technospiritual practices 
between and within each organization. This contrast demonstrates 
challenges for designing technologies for organizations that, from 
an outside perspective, appear quite similar in race and in core 
beliefs. Both churches are known to the public as ‘Black Churches’; 
however an assumption of across the board similarity would be 
misinformed. 
The importance of Church A’s legacy as being one of the frst 
Black churches in the state refects an intersectional identity of 
religion and race. Similarly, members of Church B refected the im-
portance of maintaining a connection to Black identity and African 
American religious tradition throughout our conversations. In our 
fndings, we demonstrate that participants in both churches have a 
desire to embrace other cultures, while still honoring their legacy 
and preserving Black History. In Church A, addressing language 
barriers to serve the local community, a mission integral to the 
history of their organization, is a priority. Thus, a technological rep-
resentation of the atmosphere both churches aim to create would 
include Black History while simultaneously welcoming other cul-
tural identities. As such, for this church, a misinformed design 
might be an mHealth application that celebrated Black History and 
Black Culture, but did so in absence of any other cultural identities. 
Our fndings point to shifts in the racial and ethnic identities of 
church communities. Church B has had success in rapidly grow-
ing their membership. Since the early days of the church, they 
have incorporated technology, and they continue to foster a syn-
ergy between technospiritual personal use both within and outside 
the Church walls. Even with the pervasive use of communication 
technologies, Church B members shared feelings of exclusion due 
to socioeconomic status, as well as an infux of new members.CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan O’Leary and Stowell, et al. 
These fndings demonstrate a need for sociotechnical interventions 
designed to nurture a sense of belonging in a CBO. Fully ofine 
solutions, such as local Bible study groups, dissolved due to lack 
of community capacity; however, fellowship opportunities hosted 
entirely online are still likely to fail due to the value placed on 
in-person fellowship. Thus, future work should explore how hybrid 
online and ofine sociotechnical solutions can support CBO values 
by fostering a sense of belonging and deepening a sense of social 
connectedness in religious communities. Such work would extend 
existing research on social computing in place-based communities 
[32, 63] by demonstrating the particular challenges and afordances 
raised when studying the intersection of racial identities and reli-
gious communities. 
5.2.2 “Innovation” vs. Sacred Spaces. Engaging younger church 
members is a secondary goal of the church, and our participants 
posit that technology may be an answer for recruiting younger fam-
ilies and young adults. However, concern remains that technology 
integration could sit in tension with tradition. Utilizing technol-
ogy to address such a challenge requires great sensitivity to values 
central to this particular organization. The extensive preservation 
eforts in Church A may speak to the value that the community 
places on not only a traditional space for worship, but also a physical 
symbol and catalyst for social action within the Black community. 
Gaver et al. considered the importance of both materiality (e.g., 
aesthetics, cultural signifcance) and functionality when design-
ing a device to support prayer among closiderted nuns [30]. Their 
design team was careful to understand the cultural signifcance 
of the space and of the religious practice (e.g., need for ambience 
in both physical form and sound). Their formative work led them 
to create an unobtrusive artifact that respects the core values of 
the population (e.g., their physical prayer space) while simultane-
ously adding meaningful functionality to their spiritual practices. 
Similarly, recommendations to embed technology in sacred church 
spaces may not be desirable for all predominantly Black church 
communities, and may not address some of their most valued and 
prescient missions. There instead is a need to understand these 
historic buildings as assets despite the potential constraints they 
may place on technospiritual innovation. 
As mentioned in our fndings, we uncovered a tension between 
church members using technology for spiritual practices outside of 
Church A, but limiting their use inside the sanctuary. In comparison, 
Church B members used technology both inside and outside the 
church walls. Our fndings suggest that for Church A, relying on 
physical Bibles and Hymnals allows church members to refect their 
own cultural positionality on the value of knowledge of the Bible as 
a physical text. Buchannan et al. detailed a similar phenomenon of 
signaling literary cultural knowledge among bookshop customers. 
They observed the social benefts that customers experienced when 
demonstrating their knowledge to bookshop owners. They posit 
that such social practices could be lost if fully replaced by digital 
services [9]. Similarly, with the installation of digital projectors to 
display Scripture, the church may lose both their traditional worship 
environment and the ability to express their cultural knowledge of 
the Bible. 
Perspectives on the role of technology in sacred spaces and in 
private and public worship varied between churches and among members of the same church. These distinct perspectives demon-
strate how churches attempt to work through the tension between 
“innovation” and preserving the integrity of their buildings. There is 
a need for design methods that help churches explore the tensions 
of innovation and sacred space. These methods could help church 
communities move toward consensus on the role of technology in 
the church, as well as provide a better sense of the implications of 
such technological integration. Such methods would expand upon 
recent work at the intersection of architecture, culture, faith, and 
information and communication technologies [56]. 
5.2.3 Supporting Church Mission and Social Activism. In HCI, there 
has been both a growing interest in the design of technologies that 
address issues of social justice [23, 25], as well as calls to center 
voices from traditionally marginalized populations within design 
processes [70]. The Black Church is an important site for both past 
and present social justice eforts [ 79]. In examining the core mis-
sions and identities of both church communities, it became clear 
that Church B’s identity was rooted frmly in social justice and 
social action activities. While not all churches with predominantly 
Black memberships have a social action orientation, those that 
do may be potential sites for the development of civic technology 
innovations that amplify social justice eforts paramount to the 
specifc community. Such eforts require the design of fexible tools 
to assist in the identifcation of community resources, and in build-
ing community capacity. As with many CBOs, the mission work 
of the church is accomplished almost entirely through volunteer 
eforts. HCI researchers should examine how technology is already 
being used to support the goals held in the context of churches 
with predominantly Black membership and potential challenges of 
technology integration. Tools to support social justice should con-
nect members within their church community, while also building 
connections to a broader network of organizations with compli-
mentary capacities. We recommend that future work explore this 
potential design space. 
6 CONCLUSION 
Through our photovoice study, we investigated the intersection of 
racial identity and religion in the context of designing technology 
for two community based organizations. Our fndings speak to the 
intricacies of community identity, namely how members balance 
honoring legacy with current culture and future goals, and the 
implications for designing sociotechnical systems embedded within 
community organizations. We provide refections on our method 
of engaging with racial identity in community-engaged HCI, and 
discuss design opportunities for technology to augment church 
community missions and future aspirations. Our work contributes 
to research on how to design technology that is both for and meant 
to augment multicultural community organizations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science 
Foundation under Grant No.1831755. Any opinions, fndings, and 
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are 
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily refect the views of 
the National Science Foundation.Examining the Intersections of Race, Religion & Community Technologies: A Photovoice Study CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
REFERENCES 
[1] Charles Agyemang, Raj Bhopal, and Marc Bruijnzeels. 2005. Negro, Black, Black 
African, African Caribbean, African American or what? Labelling African origin 
populations in the health arena in the 21st century. Journal of Epidemiology & 
Community Health 59, 12 (2005), 1014–1018. 
[2] Sandra L Barnes. 2004. Priestly and prophetic infuences on black church social 
services. Social Problems 51, 2 (2004), 202–221. 
[3] Keith C Barton. 2015. Elicitation techniques: Getting people to talk about ideas 
they don’t usually talk about. Theory & Research in Social Education 43, 2 (2015), 
179–205. 
[4] Genevieve Bell. 2006. No More SMS from Jesus: Ubicomp, Religion and Techno-
Spiritual Practices. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Ubiquitous 
Computing (Orange County, CA) (UbiComp’06). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidel-
berg, 141–158. https://doi.org/10.1007/11853565_9 
[5] Ruha Benjamin. 2020. Race After Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the New 
Jim Code. Social forces 98, 4 (2020), 1–3. 
[6] Shlomo Berkovsky, Jill Freyne, and Mac Coombe. 2012. Physical Activity Moti-
vating Games: Be Active and Get Your Own Reward. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. 
Interact. 19, 4, Article 32 (Dec. 2012), 41 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/2395131. 
2395139 
[7] LaPrincess C Brewer, Sarah Jenkins, Kandace Lackore, Jacqueline Johnson, 
Clarence Jones, Lisa A Cooper, Carmen Radecki Breitkopf, Sharonne N Hayes, 
and Christi Patten. 2018. mHealth intervention promoting cardiovascular health 
among African-Americans: recruitment and baseline characteristics of a pilot 
study. JMIR research protocols 7, 1 (2018), e31. 
[8] André Brock Jr. 2020. Distributed Blackness: African American Cybercultures. 
Vol. 9. NYU Press, New York, NY. 
[9] George Buchanan and Dana McKay. 2011. In the Bookshop: Examining Popular 
Search Strategies. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual International ACM/IEEE Joint 
Conference on Digital Libraries (Ottawa, Ontario, Canada) (JCDL ’11). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 269–278. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/1998076.1998127 
[10] Kirsten Budig, Julia Diez, Paloma Conde, Marta Sastre, Mariano Hernán, and 
Manuel Franco. 2018. Photovoice and empowerment: evaluating the transforma-
tive potential of a participatory action research project. BMC public health 18, 1 
(2018), 1–9. 
[11] Elizabeth Buie and Mark Blythe. 2013. Spirituality: There’s an App for That! 
(But Not a Lot of Research). In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (Paris, France) (CHI EA ’13). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2315–2324. https://doi.org/10.1145/2468356. 
2468754 
[12] Marci Kramish Campbell, Marlyn Allicock Hudson, Ken Resnicow, Natasha 
Blakeney, Amy Paxton, and Monica Baskin. 2007. Church-based health promotion 
interventions: evidence and lessons learned. Annu. Rev. Public Health 28 (2007), 
213–234. 
[13] Caricia Catalani and Meredith Minkler. 2010. Photovoice: A review of the lit-
erature in health and public health. Health education & behavior 37, 3 (2010), 
424–451. 
[14] Pew Research Center. 2019. Smartphones help blacks, Hispanics bridge 
some – but not all – digital gaps with whites. Retrieved January 10, 
2021 from https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/08/20/smartphones-
help-blacks-hispanics-bridge-some-but-not-all-digital-gaps-with-whites/ 
[15] Alexander Cho, Roxana G. Herrera, Luis Chaidez, and Adilene Uriostegui. 2019. 
The "Comadre" Project: An Asset-Based Design Approach to Connecting Low-
Income Latinx Families to Out-of-School Learning Opportunities. In Proceedings 
of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, 
Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300837 
[16] African Methodist Episcopal Church. 2021. Church Mission. Retrieved January 
10, 2021 from https://www.ame-church.com/our-church/our-mission/ 
[17] African Methodist Episcopal Church. 2021. History. Retrieved January 10, 2021 
from https://www.ame-church.com/our-church/our-history/ 
[18] Eric Corbett and Yanni Loukissas. 2019. Engaging Gentrifcation as a Social 
Justice Issue in HCI. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300510 
[19] Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss. 2014. Basics of qualitative research: Techniques 
and procedures for developing grounded theory (4th ed. ed.). Sage publications, 
Thousand Oaks, CA. 
[20] Richard Delgado. 2012. Critical race theory : an introduction (2nd ed. ed.). New 
York University Press, New York. 
[21] Jessa Dickinson, Mark Díaz, Christopher A. Le Dantec, and Sheena Erete. 2019. 
"The Cavalry Ain’t Coming in to Save Us": Supporting Capacities and Relation-
ships through Civic Tech. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 3, CSCW, Article 
123 (Nov. 2019), 21 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359225 
[22] Jualynne E Dodson. 2002. Engendering church : women, power, and the AME 
Church. Rowman & Littlefeld, Lanham, Md. [23] Lynn Dombrowski, Ellie Harmon, and Sarah Fox. 2016. Social Justice-Oriented 
Interaction Design: Outlining Key Design Strategies and Commitments. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (Brisbane, 
QLD, Australia) (DIS ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, 656–671. https://doi.org/10.1145/2901790.2901861 
[24] Laura E. Kozak, Charlotte A. Falk, and C. Jean Chisholm. 2020. Sticks, Ropes, 
Land: Confronting Colonial Practices in Public Space Design. In Proceedings of 
the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Participation(s) Otherwise - Volume 
2 (Manizales, Colombia) (PDC ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 63–67. https://doi.org/10.1145/3384772.3385140 
[25] Sarah Fox, Mariam Asad, Katherine Lo, Jill P. Dimond, Lynn S. Dombrowski, and 
Shaowen Bardzell. 2016. Exploring Social Justice, Design, and HCI. In Proceedings 
of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (San Jose, California, USA) (CHI EA ’16). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3293–3300. https://doi.org/10.1145/2851581. 
2856465 
[26] Sarah Fox and Christopher Le Dantec. 2014. Community Historians: Scafolding 
Community Engagement through Culture and Heritage. In Proceedings of the 
2014 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (DIS 
’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 785–794. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/2598510.2598563 
[27] Richard Fry and Kim Parker. 2018. Early Benchmarks Show’Post-Millennials’ 
on Track to Be Most Diverse, Best-Educated Generation Yet: A Demographic 
Portrait of Today’s 6-to 21-Year-Olds. 
[28] Vanessa Northington Gamble. 1993. A legacy of distrust: African Americans and 
medical research. American journal of preventive medicine 9, 6 (1993), 35–38. 
[29] Aakash Gautam, Chandani Shrestha, Deborah Tatar, and Steve Harrison. 2018. 
Social Photo-Elicitation: The Use of Communal Production of Meaning to Hear a 
Vulnerable Population. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2, CSCW, Article 56 
(Nov. 2018), 20 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3274325 
[30] William Gaver, Mark Blythe, Andy Boucher, Nadine Jarvis, John Bowers, and 
Peter Wright. 2010. The Prayer Companion: Openness and Specifcity, Materiality 
and Spirituality. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (Atlanta, Georgia, USA) (CHI ’10). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2055–2064. https://doi.org/10.1145/1753326. 
1753640 
[31] Erving Gofman. 2009. Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled identity. Simon 
and Schuster, New York, NY. 
[32] Andrea Grimes and Richard Harper. 2008. Celebratory Technology: New Di-
rections for Food Research in HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Florence, Italy) (CHI ’08). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 467–476. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
1357054.1357130 
[33] Aline Gubrium. 2009. Digital storytelling: An emergent method for health 
promotion research and practice. Health promotion practice 10, 2 (2009), 186–191. 
[34] Michael Gurstein. 2007. What is community informatics (and why does it matter)? 
Vol. 2. Polimetrica sas, Milan. 
[35] David Hankerson, Andrea R. Marshall, Jennifer Booker, Houda El Mimouni, 
Imani Walker, and Jennifer A. Rode. 2016. Does Technology Have Race?. In 
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (San Jose, California, USA) (CHI EA ’16). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 473–486. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
2851581.2892578 
[36] Dana Harley and Vanessa Hunn. 2015. Utilization of photovoice to explore hope 
and spirituality among low-income African American adolescents. Child and 
Adolescent Social Work Journal 32, 1 (2015), 3–15. 
[37] Douglas Harper. 2002. Talking about pictures: A case for photo elicitation. Visual 
studies 17, 1 (2002), 13–26. 
[38] Christina Harrington, Sheena Erete, and Anne Marie Piper. 2019. Deconstructing 
Community-Based Collaborative Design: Towards More Equitable Participatory 
Design Engagements. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 3, CSCW, Article 216 
(Nov. 2019), 25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359318 
[39] Kenneth C Hergenrather, Scott D Rhodes, Chris A Cowan, Gerta Bardhoshi, 
and Sara Pula. 2009. Photovoice as community-based participatory research: A 
qualitative review. American journal of health behavior 33, 6 (2009), 686–698. 
[40] John Iceland, Daniel H Weinberg, and Erika Steinmetz. 2002. Racial and ethnic 
residential segregation in the United States 1980-2000. 
[41] Azalea Irani, Kriti Nelavelli, Kristin Hare, Paula Bondal, and Neha Kumar. 2018. 
Refuge Tech: An Assets-Based Approach to Refugee Resettlement. In Extended 
Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI EA ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3188680 
[42] Farnaz Irannejad Bisafar, Lina Itzel Martinez, and Andrea G. Parker. 2018. Social 
Computing-Driven Activism in Youth Empowerment Organizations: Challenges 
and Opportunities. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI ’18). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173757 
[43] Farnaz Irannejad Bisafar, Aditya Ponnada, Ameneh Shamekhi, and Andrea G. 
Parker. 2017. A Sociotechnical Study of a Community-Based Rewards Program:CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan O’Leary and Stowell, et al. 
Insights on Building Social, Financial and Human Capital. Proc. ACM Hum.-
Comput. Interact. 1, CSCW, Article 55 (Dec. 2017), 21 pages. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/3134690 
[44] Barbara A Israel, Eugenia Eng, Amy J Schulz, and Edith A Parker. 2012. Methods 
for community-based participatory research for health. John Wiley & Sons, San 
Francisco, CA. 
[45] Elizabeth Kaziunas, Michael S. Klinkman, and Mark S. Ackerman. 2019. Precarious 
Interventions: Designing for Ecologies of Care. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 
3, CSCW, Article 113 (Nov. 2019), 27 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359215 
[46] Predrag Klasnja and Wanda Pratt. 2012. Healthcare in the pocket: mapping the 
space of mobile-phone health interventions. Journal of biomedical informatics 45, 
1 (2012), 184–198. 
[47] Christopher A. Le Dantec and Sarah Fox. 2015. Strangers at the Gate: Gaining 
Access, Building Rapport, and Co-Constructing Community-Based Research. 
In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work & Social Computing (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CSCW ’15). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1348–1358. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
2675133.2675147 
[48] Victor R. Lee, Joel R. Drake, Ryan Cain, and Jefrey Thayne. 2015. Oppor-
tunistic Uses of the Traditional School Day through Student Examination of 
Fitbit Activity Tracker Data. In Proceedings of the 14th International Confer-
ence on Interaction Design and Children (Boston, Massachusetts) (IDC ’15). As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 209–218. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/2771839.2771861 
[49] Jef Levin, Linda M Chatters, and Robert Joseph Taylor. 2011. Theory in religion, 
aging, and health: An overview. Journal of Religion and Health 50, 2 (2011), 
389–406. 
[50] Ellen DS López, Eugenia Eng, Elizabeth Randall-David, and Naomi Robinson. 
2005. Quality-of-life concerns of African American breast cancer survivors within 
rural North Carolina: Blending the techniques of photovoice and grounded theory. 
Qualitative Health Research 15, 1 (2005), 99–115. 
[51] Andrew Macvean and Judy Robertson. 2013. Understanding Exergame Users’ 
Physical Activity, Motivation and Behavior over Time. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Paris, France) (CHI 
’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1251–1260. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466163 
[52] Julie Maitland, Matthew Chalmers, and Katie A Siek. 2009. Persuasion not 
required Improving our understanding of the sociotechnical context of dietary 
behavioural change. In 2009 3rd International Conference on Pervasive Computing 
Technologies for Healthcare. IEEE, New York, NY, 1–8. 
[53] Khalid Majrashi. 2018. User need and experience of Hajj mobile and ubiquitous 
systems: Designing for the largest religious annual gathering. Cogent Engineering 
5, 1 (2018), 1480303. 
[54] Melissa J Marschall and Dietlind Stolle. 2004. Race and the city: Neighborhood 
context and the development of generalized trust. Political behavior 26, 2 (2004), 
125–153. 
[55] Andrew D. Miller and Elizabeth D. Mynatt. 2014. StepStream: A School-Based 
Pervasive Social Fitness System for Everyday Adolescent Health. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada) (CHI ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
2823–2832. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557190 
[56] Nusrat Jahan Mim and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. Others’ Images: Online Social 
Media, Architectural Improvisations, and Spatial Marginalization in Bangladesh. 
In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376572 
[57] Meredith Minkler and Nina Wallerstein. 2011. Community-based participatory 
research for health: From process to outcomes. John Wiley & Sons, San Francisco, 
CA. 
[58] Ann Morning. 2008. Ethnic Classifcation in Global Perspective: A Cross-National 
Survey of the 2000 Census Round. Population research and policy review 27, 2 
(2008), 239–272. 
[59] Larry Murphy. 2000. Down by the riverside: readings in African American Religion . 
Vol. 8. NYU Press, New York, NY. 
[60] Maury Nation, Timothy Fortney, and Abraham Wandersman. 2010. Race, place, 
and neighboring: Social ties among neighbors in urban, suburban, and rural 
contexts. Environment and Behavior 42, 5 (2010), 581–596. 
[61] Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya-Ogburu, Angela D.R. Smith, Alexandra To, and Kentaro 
Toyama. 2020. Critical Race Theory for HCI. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI 
’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–16. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376392 
[62] Teresa K O’Leary, Elizabeth Stowell, Everlyne Kimani, Dhaval Parmar, Stefan 
Olafsson, Jessica Hofman, Andrea G Parker, Michael K Paasche-Orlow, and 
Timothy Bickmore. 2020. Community-Based Cultural Tailoring of Virtual Agents. 
In Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on Intelligent Virtual 
Agents. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–8. 
[63] Andrea Parker, Vasudhara Kantroo, Hee Rin Lee, Miguel Osornio, Mansi Sharma, 
and Rebecca Grinter. 2012. Health Promotion as Activism: Building Community Capacity to Efect Social Change. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Austin, Texas, USA) (CHI ’12). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 99–108. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
2207676.2207692 
[64] PBS. 2019. The Black Church. Retrieved January 10, 2021 from https://www.pbs. 
org/wgbh/americanexperience/features/godinamerica-black-church/ 
[65] Lucy Pei and Bonnie Nardi. 2019. We Did It Right, But It Was Still Wrong: Toward 
Assets-Based Design. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI EA ’19). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3290607.3310434 
[66] Jane Peterson, Jan R Atwood, and Bernice Yates. 2002. Key elements for church-
based health promotion programs: outcome-based literature review. Public Health 
Nursing 19, 6 (2002), 401–411. 
[67] Ryan J Petteway. 2019. Intergenerational photovoice perspectives of place and 
health in public housing: participatory coding, theming, and mapping in/of the 
“Structure Struggle”. Health & place 60 (2019), 102229. 
[68] Erika Shehan Poole, Andrew D. Miller, Yan Xu, Elsa Eiriksdottir, Richard Catram-
bone, and Elizabeth D. Mynatt. 2011. The Place for Ubiquitous Computing in 
Schools: Lessons Learned from a School-Based Intervention for Youth Physical 
Activity. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Ubiquitous Com-
puting (Beijing, China) (UbiComp ’11). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 395–404. https://doi.org/10.1145/2030112.2030165 
[69] Robert Racadio, Emma J. Rose, and Beth E. Kolko. 2014. Research at the Margin: 
Participatory Design and Community Based Participatory Research. In Proceed-
ings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference: Short Papers, Industry Cases, 
Workshop Descriptions, Doctoral Consortium Papers, and Keynote Abstracts - Vol-
ume 2 (Windhoek, Namibia) (PDC ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 49–52. https://doi.org/10.1145/2662155.2662188 
[70] Emma J. Rose, Avery Edenfeld, Rebecca Walton, Laura Gonzales, Ann Shivers 
McNair, Tetyana Zhvotovska, Natasha Jones, Genevieve I. Garcia de Mueller, and 
Kristen Moore. 2018. Social Justice in UX: Centering Marginalized Users. In Pro-
ceedings of the 36th ACM International Conference on the Design of Communication
(Milwaukee, WI, USA) (SIGDOC ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, Article 21, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3233756.3233931 
[71] Corrine R Sackett and Jardin N Dogan. 2019. An Exploration of Black Teens’ 
Experiences of Their Own Racial Identity Through Photovoice: Implications for 
Counselors. Journal of Multicultural Counseling and Development 47, 3 (2019), 
172–189. 
[72] Herman Saksono, Carmen Castaneda-Sceppa, Jessica Hofman, Magy Seif El-
Nasr, Vivien Morris, and Andrea G. Parker. 2018. Family Health Promotion in 
Low-SES Neighborhoods: A Two-Month Study of Wearable Activity Tracking. In 
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173883 
[73] Herman Saksono, Ashwini Ranade, Geeta Kamarthi, Carmen Castaneda-Sceppa, 
Jessica A. Hofman, Cathy Wirth, and Andrea G. Parker. 2015. Spaceship Launch: 
Designing a Collaborative Exergame for Families. In Proceedings of the 18th 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing 
(Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CSCW ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 1776–1787. https://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675159 
[74] Ari Schlesinger, W. Keith Edwards, and Rebecca E. Grinter. 2017. Intersectional 
HCI: Engaging Identity through Gender, Race, and Class. In Proceedings of the 
2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado, 
USA) (CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
5412–5427. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025766 
[75] Angela D. R. Smith, Alex A. Ahmed, Adriana Alvarado Garcia, Bryan Dosono, 
Ihudiya Ogbonnaya-Ogburu, Yolanda Rankin, Alexandra To, and Kentaro Toyama. 
2020. What’s Race Got To Do With It? Engaging in Race in HCI. In Extended 
Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI EA ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3375156 
[76] Rhiannon Sterling and John Zimmerman. 2007. Shared Moments: Opportunities 
for Mobile Phones in Religious Participation. In Proceedings of the 2007 Conference 
on Designing for User EXperiences (Chicago, Illinois) (DUX ’07). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 15, 6 pages. https://doi.org/ 
10.1145/1389908.1389928 
[77] Elizabeth Stowell, Mercedes C. Lyson, Herman Saksono, Reneé C. Wurth, Holly 
Jimison, Misha Pavel, and Andrea G. Parker. 2018. Designing and Evaluating 
mHealth Interventions for Vulnerable Populations: A Systematic Review. In 
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173589 
[78] Elizabeth Stowell, Teresa K. O’Leary, Everlyne Kimani, Michael K. Paasche-Orlow, 
Timothy Bickmore, and Andrea G. Parker. 2020. Investigating Opportunities for 
Crowdsourcing in Church-Based Health Interventions: A Participatory Design 
Study. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in ComputingExamining the Intersections of Race, Religion & Community Technologies: A Photovoice Study CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376833 
[79] Robert Joseph Taylor, Linda M Chatters, and Jef Levin. 2003. Religion in the 
lives of African Americans: Social, psychological, and health perspectives. Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA. 
[80] Michelle Teti, Cynthia Murray, LaShaune Johnson, and Diane Binson. 2012. Pho-
tovoice as a community-based participatory research method among women 
living with HIV/AIDS: Ethical opportunities and challenges. Journal of Empirical 
Research on Human Research Ethics 7, 4 (2012), 34–43. 
[81] Jasper Tran O’Leary, Sara Zewde, Jennifer Mankof, and Daniela K. Rosner. 2019. 
Who Gets to Future? Race, Representation, and Design Methods in Africatown. 
In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300791 
[82] Kim M Unertl, Chris L Schaefbauer, Terrance R Campbell, Charles Senteio, Katie A 
Siek, Suzanne Bakken, and Tifany C Veinot. 2016. Integrating community-based 
participatory research and informatics approaches to improve the engagement 
and health of underserved populations. Journal of the American Medical Infor-
matics Association 23, 1 (2016), 60–73. 
[83] Amy Voida, Ellie Harmon, and Ban Al-Ani. 2011. Homebrew Databases: Com-
plexities of Everyday Information Management in Nonproft Organizations. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CHI ’11). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 915–924. https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979078 
[84] Amy Voida, Ellie Harmon, and Ban Al-Ani. 2012. Bridging between Organizations 
and the Public: Volunteer Coordinators’ Uneasy Relationship with Social Com-
puting. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (Austin, Texas, USA) (CHI ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 1967–1976. https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208341 
[85] Caroline Wang and Mary Ann Burris. 1997. Photovoice: Concept, methodology, 
and use for participatory needs assessment. Health education & behavior 24, 3 
(1997), 369–387. [86] Caroline C Wang, Susan Morrel-Samuels, Peter M Hutchison, Lee Bell, and 
Robert M Pestronk. 2004. Flint photovoice: Community building among youths, 
adults, and policymakers. American journal of public health 94, 6 (2004), 911–913. 
[87] Caroline C Wang and Yanique A Redwood-Jones. 2001. Photovoice ethics: Perspec-
tives from Flint photovoice. Health education & behavior 28, 5 (2001), 560–572. 
[88] David R Williams. 1997. Race and health: basic questions, emerging directions. 
Annals of epidemiology 7, 5 (1997), 322–333. 
[89] David R Williams and Toni D Rucker. 2000. Understanding and addressing racial 
disparities in health care. Health care fnancing review 21, 4 (2000), 75. 
[90] Margaret A Winker. 2004. Measuring race and ethnicity: why and how? Jama 
292, 13 (2004), 1612–1614. 
[91] Susan P. Wyche, Paul M. Aoki, and Rebecca E. Grinter. 2008. Re-Placing Faith: 
Reconsidering the Secular-Religious Use Divide in the United States and Kenya. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(Florence, Italy) (CHI ’08). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, 11–20. https://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357057 
[92] Susan P. Wyche, Kelly E. Caine, Benjamin Davison, Micheal Arteaga, and Re-
becca E. Grinter. 2008. Sun Dial: Exploring Techno-Spiritual Design through 
a Mobile Islamic Call to Prayer Application. In CHI ’08 Extended Abstracts 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Florence, Italy) (CHI EA ’08). Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3411–3416. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/1358628.1358866 
[93] Susan P. Wyche, Gillian R. Hayes, Lonnie D. Harvel, and Rebecca E. Grinter. 
2006. Technology in Spiritual Formation: An Exploratory Study of Computer 
Mediated Religious Communications. In Proceedings of the 2006 20th Anniversary 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (Banf, Alberta, Canada) 
(CSCW ’06). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 199–208. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1180875.1180908 
[94] Susan P. Wyche, Yevgeniy Medynskiy, and Rebecca E. Grinter. 2007. Explor-
ing the Use of Large Displays in American Megachurches. In CHI ’07 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose, CA, USA) (CHI 
EA ’07). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2771–2776. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1240866.1241077