QTBIPOC PD: Exploring the Intersections of Race, Gender, and
Sexual Orientation in Participatory Design
Naba Rizvi
nrizvi@ucsd.edu
University of California, San Diego
San Diego, USAReggie Casanova-Perez, MS
reggiecp@uw.edu
University of Washington
Seattle, USAHarshini Ramaswamy
University of California, San Diego
San Diego, USA
hramaswamy@ucsd.edu
Lisa G. Dirks, MS, MLIS
University of Washington
Seattle, USA
lgdirks@uw.eduEmily Bascom
University of Washington
Seattle, USA
embascom@uw.eduNadir Weibel, PhD
University of California, San Diego
San Diego, USA
weibel@ucsd.edu
ABSTRACT
As Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) research aims to be inclu-
sive and representative of many marginalized identities, there is
still a lack of available literature and research on intersectional con-
siderations of race, gender, and sexual orientation, especially when
it comes to participatory design. We aim to create a space to gener-
ate community recommendations for effectively and appropriately
engaging Queer, Transgender, Black, Indigenous, People of Color
(QTBIPOC) populations in participatory design, and discuss meth-
ods of dissemination for recommendations. Workshop participants
will engage with critical race theory, queer theory, and feminist
theory to reflect on current exclusionary HCI and participatory
design methods and practices.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →Participatory design .
ACM Reference Format:
Naba Rizvi, Reggie Casanova-Perez, MS, Harshini Ramaswamy, Lisa G.
Dirks, MS, MLIS, Emily Bascom, and Nadir Weibel, PhD. 2022. QTBIPOC
PD: Exploring the Intersections of Race, Gender, and Sexual Orientation in
Participatory Design. In CHI ’22, ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, April 30- May 06, 2022, New Orleans, LA. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3503733
1 BACKGROUND
The power inequalities in HCI research involving marginalized
communities have been investigated by researchers utilizing femi-
nism [ 2], critical race theory [ 8], decolonial theory [ 1,3,13], and
queer theory [ 12]. While the intersectionality [ 4] of race, gender,
sexual orientation, and gender identity has been explored in do-
mains like law [ 5], healthcare [ 6], and education [ 9], little work
has been done on engaging with Queer, Transgender, Black, In-
digenous, People of Color (QTBIPOC) populations in participatory
design research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CHI ’22, April 30- May 06, 2022, New Orleans, LA
©2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9156-6/22/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3503733Participatory design is a well-known and often utilized method
in HCI research [ 11], that typically aims to involve end-users and
other stakeholders (family member, employees, customers, partners,
etc.) in the design process. Harrington et al. describe participatory
design as a powerful tool for involving marginalized communities
in design [ 7]. However, to employ inclusive research practices re-
quires that researchers consider the social and cultural expectations
associated with participatory design methods and how they will im-
pact the communities involved in the design process, as well as the
conventions for representing these participants when reporting on
research, which remain unexplored for the QTBIPOC community.
In this workshop we focus specifically on how to effectively
incorporate intersectionality in participatory design. The central
goal of intersectionality is to increase the understanding of how an
individual’s social and political identities interact to influence their
lived experiences [ 10]. Incorporating intersectionality in partici-
patory design research will help advance our understanding of a
participant’s overlapping identities which inform their engagement
with technology and their environment. Representing the inter-
sectionality of participants’ identities and experiences in research
and design in participatory design is imperative to better serve
marginalized communities, especially at the intersection of the
Queer-Trans (QT), Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC)
communities.
The main structure of our workshop is being developed and
facilitated by a core group of organizers, supported by a steering
committee that will help guide discussions on the intersectionality
of race, gender, and sexual orientation in participatory design re-
search. This committee includes researchers who have engaged in
participatory design with QTBIPOC populations and community
champions working at this intersection.
Throughout the workshop we aim to create opportunities for
guided discussions that will culminate in three distinct dissemina-
tion methods: (1) a website that extends the workshop into a living
venue where researchers and community can consult results of the
workshop and further engage in the future, (2) a public forum (e.g.
a Medium blog) that summarizes our discussions on more inclusive
categorizations of race, gender, and sexual orientation in research
studies, and elicits further and broader community discussion be-
yond the scope of our workshop, and (3) a research paper outlining
recommendations for engaging in participatory design with QT-
BIPOC populations that can help the HCI research community.CHI ’22, April 30- May 06, 2022, New Orleans, LA Rizvi and Casanova-Perez, et al.
Our workshop also provides researchers interested in engaging
QTBIPOC people in HCI research an opportunity to network and
form a community.
2 ORGANIZERS
The organizers for this workshop have diverse backgrounds. Rele-
vant to this workshop, we disclose that we have queer and interna-
tional organizers from various backgrounds who are from countries
in Asia, North America, South America, and Europe. This group of
organizers includes individuals who have experience engaging in
participatory design research with QTBIPOC populations.
Naba Rizvi (she/her), is a queer international student from Pak-
istan and Saudi Arabia, a 2nd year Ph.D student at the University
of California, San Diego, and a 2020 NCWIT Collegiate Award re-
cipient. Her research interests include exploring the intersections
of race, gender, disability, and sexual orientation to guide inclusive
participatory design research.
Reggie Casanova-Perez, MS (he/him), is a migrant trans non-
binary 4th year Ph.D student in Biomedical and Health Informatics
at University of Washington. His research interests focuses on
making healthcare information systems more inclusive to gender-
diverse patients using feminism and queer theory approaches.
Harshini Ramaswamy (she/her), is a 4th year South Asian
American undergraduate student studying Cognitive Science with
a specialization in Design and Interaction at the University of Cali-
fornia, San Diego. Her research interests include human-centered
design and research in technology and healthcare settings.
Lisa G. Dirks, MS, MLIS (she/her), is a Ph.D. candidate at the
University of Washington Information School. She is Alaska Native
and White and grew up in a rural Unangan (Aleut) community in
the Western Aleutian Islands. A social and information scientist, her
research interests include health informatics, human-information
interaction, user experience, Indigenous health, research dissemi-
nation, and community-engaged and participatory research.
Emily Bascom (she/her), is a 4th year undergraduate student
studying Informatics with a specialization in Human-Computer
Interaction at the University of Washington. Her research interests
surround how information is created, disseminated, and uptaken by
the public and how to holistically represent users in HCI research
and informatics systems.
Nadir Weibel, PhD (he/him), is an Associate Professor in the
Department of Computer Science and Engineering at UC San Diego,
and a Research Health Science Specialist at the VA San Diego Health
System. He is one of the faculty of the UCSD Design Lab, Contextual
Robotics Institute, Center for Population and Health Systems, and
the Research Center on Optimal Digital Ethics. His work on Human-
centered eXtended Intelligence is situated at the intersection of
computer science, design, and the health sciences, and strive to
support a diverse end-user population through user-centered and
participatory design.
3 WEBSITE
The workshop’s website (http://qtbipoc-hci.org) will contain all
information about our workshop, including how we solicit submis-
sions. We include a Call for Participation, information about the
organizers, the workshop’s schedule and outline, the list of acceptedsubmissions and post-workshop documents, and contact informa-
tion. The website also serves as a repository for materials for our
reading group and post-workshop plans, including public outreach
updates. Accepted submissions regarding researchers’ experience
engaging with the QTBIPOC community will be available through
our website with their authors’ consent.
4 PRE-WORKSHOP PLANS
We will promote our workshop through our website and social
media channels (Facebook groups, Twitter, institutional Slack chan-
nels, listservs, etc.). To broaden our pool of participants, we will
also advertise the workshop with relevant organizations that have
contact with the QTBIPOC community. Accepted submissions will
be notified by March 20, 2022. Our submission form will include a
section for participants to state their accessibility needs so we can
provide accommodations as needed.
We will have two reading groups between the time when par-
ticipants are notified that they have been accepted and the work-
shop date. These reading groups will require attendance at a one-
hour remote session dedicated to discussing readings sent to the
participants beforehand to prepare participants for the types of
conversations that will be facilitated during the workshop. Our
steering committee will help with selecting appropriate reading
and resources. The goal of these conversations is to create recom-
mendations for considering the intersectionality of race, gender,
and sexual orientation in participatory design research. Suggested
readings and resources will include peer-reviewed literature and
works published through other mediums such as personal docu-
ments, Medium blogs, Ted Talks, and Zines. The spectrum of source
types will provide a deeper, holistic understanding of both research
and personal experiences related to this important subject matter.
Transcripts for the meetings will be provided to all participants for
accessibility and to review following the meeting.
5 IN-PERSON, HYBRID, OR VIRTUAL-ONLY
Our workshop participants will attend two video conferencing calls
before the workshop; each will be a 1-hour pre-workshop reading
group discussion. During our workshop at CHI 2022, participants
will have the option to either attend in-person or conference call
in to the meeting. Additionally, attendees will be able to access
all written materials used for the workshops, including recordings
and transcripts from our reading groups, on our website following
each meeting. We will provide accommodations as specified and
requested by participants in the submissions form.
Since our goal is to engage a new community interested in HCI
research with QTBIPOC people, we will open up remote workshop
participation to additional participants attending the CHI 2022
conference. We hope that additional participants will be able to
learn and contribute to the workshop topic, and join the burgeoning
community.
6 ASYNCHRONOUS ENGAGEMENT
To facilitate asynchronous discussions before the workshop, we
will set up communication channels that are easy to join for our
community participants (e.g. through Slack, Discord, or Discourse).
Additionally, all reading materials, summaries, and notes from ourQTBIPOC PD: Exploring the Intersections of Race, Gender, and Sexual Orientation in Participatory Design CHI ’22, April 30- May 06, 2022, New Orleans, LA
Period Activity
January-February 2022 Steering Committee and Organizers select readings and materials
March 20th Reading Assignments are sent to Participants
4 weeks prior to CHI 2022 Workshop 1st online reading group meet-up: Race in HCI
2 weeks prior to CHI 2022 Workshop 2nd online reading group meet-up: Gender and Sexual Orientation in HCI
Table 1: Pre-Workshop Activities
Time (PST) Activity
9 am - 9.30 am Introductions & Review of Workshop Goals
9.30 am - 10.15 am Invited Community Keynotes
10.15 am - 11.00 am Summary of Reading Group Discussions:
-Race in HCI
-Gender and sexual orientation in HCI
11.00 am - 11.30 am Break
11.30 am - 12:15 pm Problems and Opportunities Discussion:
-Problems with design thinking methodology for the QTBIPOC community
-How would HCI would benefit from using an intersectional approach
12:15 pm - 12.45 pm Network and Discover
12:45 pm - 1:45 pm Lunch Break
1.45 pm - 3:30 PM Recommendations and Considerations Discussion:
-Recommendation generation for community-based participatory design with the
QTBIPOC community.
-Brainstorming for instrument development that is respectful of people’s race, gender and
sexual orientation, and their intersections.
3.30 pm - 4 pm Closing
Table 2: Workshop schedule
discussions will be available to all participants through our website.
During online engagements, we will offer live captioning and ensure
our slideshow and other materials in the workshop follow the W3C
guidelines for accessibility.
7 WORKSHOP STRUCTURE
Table 1 shows our pre-workshop activities, while Table 2 displays
the proposed schedule for our workshop. Time will be allocated at
the beginning of the workshop to make brief introductions, elabo-
rate on community guidelines and expectations for participation in
the workshop, and develop rapport with participants to facilitate
open discussion surrounding the intersectionality of race, gender,
and sexual orientation in HCI and design research.
We will provide a summary of the motivations, goals and desired
outcomes of the workshop. We will invite community champions
and advocates working on instersectionality, race, gender, and sex-
ual orientation to share their thoughts in short opening keynotes.
We will then share the outcomes of our reading groups, and invite
participants to share their perspectives on current or emerging
challenges to be addressed in participatory design research in re-
lation to intersectionality. We will also include an overview of
anti-racist, queer, and feminist theories. We will then encourage
discussion with participants on whether current standards for in-
clusive HCI methodologies and practices incorporate anti-racism,
anti-queerphobia, and feminist theory.8 POST-WORKSHOP PLANS
After the workshop, we will compile all material from the reading
groups and the workshop discussions to produce: (1) a website
making workshop resources available to the QTBIPOC community
at large, (2) a Medium blog article for the general public, and (3) a
research paper for the academic community.
We expect to release recommendations on how to consider inter-
sectionality in participatory design research in the planned journal
paper, and we will transform our workshop website into a living
community page where we will disseminate our recommendations
to interested community and research partners.
In addition to our dissemination plans, we expect that the work-
shop will attract QTBIPOC researchers and offer networking oppor-
tunities within this community. We will nurture these networking
opportunities and facilitate them through the participants’ chosen
communication channel such as Slack or Discord.
9 CALL FOR PARTICIPATION
We invite participants interested in engaging with the intersection
of race, gender, and sexual orientation in participatory design. Our
workshop seeks to provide a safe space for scholars to share their
experiences with participatory design methodology that excludes
the experiences of marginalized participants. We have two goals:
(1) to create recommendations for engaging in participatory designCHI ’22, April 30- May 06, 2022, New Orleans, LA Rizvi and Casanova-Perez, et al.
research with the QTBIPOC community, and (2) determine meth-
ods to disseminate the recommendations and reflections from the
workshop.
Participants can join our workshop in two different ways:
•Positionality Submissions - Emerging QTBIPOC researchers
who want to contribute to the discussion can submit a posi-
tionality statement explaining what being QTBIPOC means
to them, challenges they may have encountered as a QT-
BIPOC researcher, and how that has influenced their research
interests.
•Experience Submissions - For researchers that have ex-
perience working with QTBIPOC communities who may
or may not be QTBIPOC themselves. This submission will
include a detailed explanation on their experience working
with LGBTQ+ and/or BIPOC communities. The submissions
do not need to focus on the intersection of the two identities.
Submission deadline is February 24th 2022 (23:59 PT). Position-
ality Submissions will not need to follow a specific format, whereas
the Experience Submissions must follow the standard CHI format.
All submissions must be sent as a PDF file using the Google Form
available on the website.
Participants will be selected on the basis of the quality of their
submissions. At least one author of each accepted submission must
attend the workshop. The organizing committee can be contacted
via email to answer relevant questions.
REFERENCES
[1]Adriana Alvarado Garcia, Juan F Maestre, Manuhuia Barcham, Marilyn Iriarte,
Marisol Wong-Villacres, Oscar A Lemus, Palak Dudani, Pedro Reynolds-Cuéllar,
Ruotong Wang, and Teresa Cerratto Pargman. 2021. Decolonial Pathways: Our
Manifesto for a Decolonizing Agenda in HCI Research and Design. In Extended
Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .
1–9.
[2]Shaowen Bardzell and Jeffrey Bardzell. 2011. Towards a feminist HCI methodol-
ogy: social science, feminism, and HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on human factors in computing systems . 675–684.
[3]Vikram Kamath Cannanure, Dilrukshi Gamage, Christian Sturm, Heike
Winschiers-Theophilus, Juan Fernando Maestre, Naveena Karusala, Pedro
Reynolds-Cuéllar, and Neha Kumar. 2021. Decolonizing HCI Across Borders. In
Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems . 1–5.
[4]Kimberle Crenshaw. 1990. Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity
politics, and violence against women of color. Stan. L. Rev. 43 (1990), 1241.
[5]Kimberlé Crenshaw. 2015. Why intersectionality can’t wait. The Washington Post
24, 09 (2015), 2015.
[6]Courtland Douglas, Jannis Moody, and Dominique A Broussard. 2019. Black
beyond the rainbow: Clinical implications for the intersectionality of race, gender,
and queer identity. Journal of Black Sexuality and Relationships 5, 4 (2019), 21–41.
[7]Christina Harrington, Sheena Erete, and Anne Marie Piper. 2019. Deconstructing
community-based collaborative design: Towards more equitable participatory
design engagements. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3,
CSCW (2019), 1–25.
[8]Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya-Ogburu, Angela DR Smith, Alexandra To, and Kentaro
Toyama. 2020. Critical race theory for HCI. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–16.
[9]Ryan Schey. 2021. Race and Queerness in the US Schooling System. In Oxford
Research Encyclopedia of Education .
[10] Ari Schlesinger, W Keith Edwards, and Rebecca E Grinter. 2017. Intersectional
HCI: Engaging identity through gender, race, and class. In Proceedings of the 2017
CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 5412–5427.
[11] Douglas Schuler and Aki Namioka. 1993. Participatory design: Principles and
practices . CRC Press.
[12] Katta Spiel, Os Keyes, Ashley Marie Walker, Michael A DeVito, Jeremy Birnholtz,
Emeline Brulé, Ann Light, Pınar Barlas, Jean Hardy, Alex Ahmed, et al .2019.
Queer (ing) HCI: Moving forward in theory and practice. In Extended Abstracts
of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–4.[13] Marisol Wong-Villacres, Adriana Alvarado Garcia, and Javier Tibau. 2020. Reflec-
tions from the classroom and beyond: Imagining a decolonized hci education. In
Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems . 1–14.