Don’t Blush: Sexuality, Aging & Design
 
Abstract 
HCI research is increasingly addressing how technology 
and design can support the ageing process; from everyday activities, to social  life and civic participation, 
to experiences with ill heal th – particularly as age-
related illness leads to problems with independent living. Despite this increasing  interest in ageing, issues 
of sexuality and intimacy are rarely addressed, with elderly bodies often marginalis ed, infantilised and rarely 
considered as desired, desirable or sexual. Older age 
also brings an increased risk of dementia, which raises issues of informed consent in sexual relationships. Given a similarly recent increase in interest in sexual health in HCI, we bring together these converging interests in this one-day workshop, where we raise these and related topics with the DIS community to bring together researchers from a wide variety of fields to explore future avenues fo r research and design in 
this understudied but po tentially rich field. 
Author Keywords 
Ageing; sexuality; intimacy; sexual orientation; 
gender; taboo; design; futures; utopias.  
CSS Concepts 
•Human-centered computing~Human computer interaction (HCI) 
Motivation 
The theme of this year’s conference asks us to consider “more complex understandings of our future 
coexistence ”. This workshop seeks to add to this theme 
by considering the interplay between sexuality, aging Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact 
the Owner/Author.  
DIS '20 Companion, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands  
© 2020 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).  ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7987-8/20/07. https://doi.org/10.1145/3393914.3395915 Britta F. Schulte 
Bauhaus-University Weimar 99423 Weimar, Germany britta.schulte@uni-weimar.de 
 
Kellie Morrisey 
University of Limerick Limerick, V94 T9PX, Ireland Kellie.Morrissey@ul.ie 
 
Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard KTH Royal Institute of Technology 100 44 Stockholm, Sweden mljso@kth.se 
 Rens Brankaert 
TU Eindhoven 5600 MB Eindhoven,Netherlands r.g.a.brankaert@tue.nl 
 
 
Workshops
DIS ’20 Companion, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands
405and technology in order to acknowledge the complexity 
of interactions, both between humans and non-human 
actors. In this one-day workshop we bring together two strands of research that have recently been taken up by the HCI community [2, 4] but rarely cross paths: technologies to support healthy and independent living in later life, as well technologies that support the exploration of intimacy and sexuality. In this intersection, sexuality in later life is still often ignored even though many open questions remain.  
Later life can include many transition points, such as 
the death of a partner, a mo ve into care home or the 
onset of illness. It can also be the background for 
experiences commonly associated with other stages in life as well: falling in love, coming to term with one's sexuality or gender, and exploring intimacy. We suggest that the DIS community should expand their conception of aging to include these facets of a rich and full life in future ageing and sexuality research.  
Background 
The engagement with sexuality  in HCI has many 
“blind spots ” [4]. [7] outline that the topic of sexuality 
and aging is surrounded by “ageist erotophobia ” that 
hinders our frank engagement with the many often complex issues around consent, capacity and desires. Kannabiran et al [3] argue that the engagement with sexuality in general has incr eased, but that questions 
about the intersection with social justice remain; which has implications for issues of intimacy, care & embodiment. Although ma ny HCI researchers are 
happy to engage with easily-automated aspects of independent living in older age, the ‘dirty work’ of bathing and bodily care is often ignored; often these are the aspects of care in older age bring us close to the naked body and a step closer to intimacy. 
In addition, we observe increased activities within the 
HCI community to expand the frame of how ageing  is 
understood, e.g. when understanding ageing “ beyond 
accessibility ” in a recent workshop at CHI [6] or 
analysing how extant HCI rese arch frames ageing [10]. 
Technologies that address people in their later lives often “ view people as obedient and predictable users 
and consumers” [2]. Monitoring, for example, is 
commonly suggested, as if older people have nothing they might wish to hide. In  addition, older people, or 
those with conditions that mainly affect later life (i.e., dementia) are understood as a unified group [5].  
In media discourses around independent living in older 
age, care robots [9] have received much attention. These conversations often run parallel to how we as a society might engage with se x robots [8]. Both could 
be interpreted as intimate acts of care, but the two discourses rarely interact. The issues of sexuality also touch on ethical issues that need to be carefully addressed. For instance, much contemporary design for older people similarly robs them of their sexual identity; either ignoring it or producing shame [10]. 
Themes 
We delineate five overarching themes to which we invite responses from workshop participants: 
1: Sexuality as  (an element of) Care. Though a 
complicated topic, intimacy can be seen as an act of 
care and technologies can support this act. Bendel [1] writes that “ a sex life that fulfills the individual needs 
surely contributes to health and wellbeing ” when “We have little sense 
culturally of aesthetic pleasure in old flesh, or of what a beautiful old body might look like. …. Older people thus experience their aging bodies in the context of a profound cultural silence.”    
Julia Twigg [10] 
Workshops
DIS ’20 Companion, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands
406arguing for including sex robo ts in his essay on medical 
machine ethics. It could also be suggested that sex 
robots might be “ a help for disabled and older adults, 
and for possible support in therapy”  (ibid). This 
discussion often centres around (humanoid) robots, but could be extended to other types of technology as well – for instance, vibrators or fleshlights  
2: Changing Bodies. Even though the desire to be 
intimate might not decrease with age [10], the body 
changes as we age. For women, menopause might have a physical impact on sexual experiences, while changes to physical mobility can also limit or change the ways sexuality is expressed. Changes to the brain, for example through dementia, can also have strong effects and lead to increased or decreased libido.
 
3: Experiences of the body in care.  While we do not 
imply that all older people require care and assistance, many do and some of these will be living in institutional care. Here, questions around touch, privacy, as well as the need and wish for intimate touch - sexual or not - play a large role. Caregivers have to consider the privacy of those they care for, both in everyday care tasks requiring washing and dressing, but also perhaps in instances where people require space to be intimate [7]. Sensitive technology design could here add to the quality of life of those living in care homes. 
4: Complications of consent  is related to some these 
tensions. Current technosolutionist responses to 
consent and sexual assault simplify human communication in sexual situations - for instance, the blockchain-enabled consent-formalisation app LegalFling [5], which seeks to stop sexual partners reneging consent during or after sexual relations. At the same time, many ethical review boards presuppose that someone with dementia is unable to consent, instead seeking proxy consen t for research activities 
from caregivers. This oversimplified, overprotective view of experience and dementia unfailingly draws us into problems with formalising consent in sexual relationships in older age as well. 
5: Sexual Orientation and Gender is a topic that can 
be relevant at all ages. Questions of how this is 
understood and which role technology can play in giving advice, supporting in expressing oneself as well 
as barriers to this are not yet well understood in HCI. 
Future explorations of this topic could draw on existing 
literature from nursing, sociology & queer studies. 
Goals 
In this open and playful workshop, we will initiate conversations about the role technology and design can play in exploring, supportin g and enjoying intimacy and 
sexuality in later life. By bringing together researchers and designers, we will establish an agenda and nurture future collaborations on research and design of technologies in this area. We will be using storytelling to imagine opportunities and challenges of introducing technologies and digital serv ices in intimate areas of 
later life. The workshop goal is to: 1) map out possible 
themes in the intersection of design, sexuality and aging, and 2) create stories, comics, collages, artefacts, and/or utopian fictions that concretise the future role of design in older adults’ intimate and sexual lives.  
In addition to the conversations at the workshop that 
will initiate future collaborations and publications, we will design a zine (independently published publication) after the event, to summarize the discussions of the 
Workshops
DIS ’20 Companion, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands
407day and present the artefacts to a wider audience 
within academia and beyond . The informal, subversive 
nature of the zines will allow participants to express themselves more freely than might be suitable in a more traditional academic outlet. Both sexuality and ageing are broad fields and we deliberately refrain from 
giving our own definitions here. We encourage 
participants to draw on their understanding of the 
themes outlined above. We would further encourage 
contributions that provide insights from practice where these topics have either been raised successfully, or where problems appeared unexpectedly. 
References 
[1]  Oliver Bendel. 2015. Su rgical, ther apeutic, 
nursing and sex robots in machine and 
information ethics. In Machine medical ethics. Springer, 17–32. 
[2]  Gopinaath Kannabiran, Alex A. Ahmed, 
Matthew Wood, Madeline Balaam, Joshua G. 
Tanenbaum, Shaowen Ba rdzell, and Jeffrey 
Bardzell. 2018. Design fo r Sexual Wellbeing in 
HCI. In Extended Ab stracts of the 2018 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’18), ACM, New York, NY, USA, W09:1–W09:7.  
[3]  Gopinaath Kannabiran, Jeffrey Bardzell, and 
Shaowen Bardzell. 2011. How HCI talks about sexuality: discursive strategies, blind spots, and opportunities for future research. In Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on 
Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11, ACM Press, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 695.  
[4]  Bran Knowles, Vicki L. Hanson, Yvonne Rogers, 
Anne Marie Piper, Jenny Waycott, and Nigel Davies. 2019. HCI and Aging: Beyond Accessibility. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’19, ACM Press, Glasgow, Scotland UK, 1–8.  
[5] Amanda Lazar, Caroline Edasis, and Anne Marie 
Piper. 2017. A Critical Lens on Dementia and 
Design in HCI. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2175–2188.  
[6]  Paul Simpson, Maria Horne, Laura J. E. Brown, 
Christine Brown Wilson, Tommy Dickinson, and 
Kate Torkington. 2017. Old(er) care home 
residents and sexual/intimate citizenship. Ageing Soc. 37, 2 (February 2017), 243–265.  
[7]  Norman Makoto Su, Amanda Lazar, Jeffrey 
Bardzell, and Shaowen Bardzell. 2019. Of Dolls and Men: Anticipating Sexual Intimacy with Robots. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 26, 3 (May 2019), 1–35.  
[8]  Norman Makoto Su, Leslie S. Liu, and Amanda 
Lazar. 2014. Mundanely miraculous: the robot 
in healthcare. In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction Fun, Fast, Foundational - NordiCHI ’14, ACM Press, Helsinki, Finland, 391–400.  
[9]  John Vines, Gary Pritchard, Peter Wright, 
Patrick Olivier, and Ka tie Brittain. 2015. An 
Age-Old Problem: Examining the Discourses of Ageing in HCI and Strategies for Future Research. ACM Trans Comput-Hum Interact 22, 1 (February 2015), 2:1–2:27.  
[10]  Julia Twigg. 2013. Fa shion and age: Dress, the 
body and later life. A&C Black. 
Workshops
DIS ’20 Companion, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands
408