DIALOGUES  STANDPOINT
I
opportunity for like-minded people to discuss how the lack 
of conversations about race had detrimental implications for 
both minoritized researchers and participants, as well as our 
research outcomes. More importantly, this workshop allowed 
us to begin to assemble practical recommendations for those 
in this space.
As a collective, we collaboratively designed a series of 
zines to understand the following topics: race and design 
research, race and identity, reporting on race in research, 
racially inclusive research and design, and researchers’ 
positionality outside the community of focus. Culturally and 
historically, zines have served as a powerful outlet for content 
outside of the mainstream. Zines are significant because 
they offer the opportunity for connection, community, and 
networking among those interested in these topics. The 
participatory nature of the zine democratizes and progresses In 2020, several of us aimed to disrupt the status quo and 
begin conversations around race in research and what that 
meant for the HCI community. We sought to construct a 
haven for ourselves, our participants, and our research as 
people of color by adapting critical race theory to HCI [1]. 
We knew, however, we were not alone in our thoughts nor 
our experiences, so we set out to create a space for and build 
a community of individuals interested in not only discussing 
race but also grappling with better processes to implement 
radical change from individual to institutional levels.
To extend our work, we held a workshop at CHI 2020 
called “What’s Race Got to Do With It? Engaging Race 
in HCI” [2]. This workshop was by no means the solution 
to the racial problems that plague our research designs, 
methodologies, and academic and industry professions—
or more broadly, the HCI community. Instead, it was an Keepin’ It Real 
About Race  
in HCI
  Race in HCI Collective
Insights
 →We need to engage at both the institutional and individual level in order to transform HCI and impede  
the reproduction of racism and inequity.
 →Scholars should avoid forcing racial identities on people in the name of diversity and inclusion.
 →It is not the race of people that causes harm, but rather the racism of those around them. 
@INTERACTIONSMAG 28   INTERACTIONS   SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2021the consumption and production of cultural content. Much 
like critical race theory [1], the creation of zines allowed us to 
use counternarratives that are missing from the mainstream 
and that challenge the dominant assumptions.
In this article, we, the Race in HCI Collective, present and 
analyze our zines and provide further insight to illustrate the 
best practices for engaging with minoritized populations. 
Through these efforts, we hope to facilitate the broader HCI 
community’s engagement with race.
RACE AND DESIGN
Zinesters: Jaye Nias, Ron Eglash, and Audrey Bennett
We selected the topic race and design to focus on the positive, 
generative work of antiracist designers, computer scientists, 
activists, and others who are inspired by the beauty and 
sophistication of Black, Indigenous, and people of color 
(BIPOC) cultural resources. These researchers address key 
issues—wealth inequality, health disparities, and other forms 
of injustice—through the radical joy of decolonial digital 
technologies. This is often through a synthesis of cultural 
tradition and futuristic or speculative design, frequently 
referred to as Afrofuturism (Black), Indigenous futurity (Native), and Altermundos (Latinx). Jaye’s team at Brave 
IDEAS Lab, for example, has explored embodying the griot 
figure in digital agents through vocal nuances, linguistic 
patterns, and gestures. The ethnocomputing team at the 
University of Michigan has developed simulation tools 
for the complex, sophisticated algorithms in Indigenous 
and vernacular designs: African fractals, biocomplexity in 
Native agroecology, Eulerian paths in urban graffiti, and 
so on. Whether it is robotic griots, fractal architectures, 
or cultural biocomputation, we caution against reducing 
these ethnocomputing systems to merely tricks for bringing 
kids into computing. Rather, we encourage all researchers 
to approach ethnocomputing generatively, as a means to 
transform the benefits of computer science into outcomes that 
benefit the communities of origin.
This requires thoughtful application in education. 
Controlled studies show statistically significant increases in 
STEM interest and achievement when ethnocomputing is 
used appropriately (https:/ /csdt.org/publications/). But why? 
Systemic racism enforces the colonial myth of “primitive” 
Black and Native origins. Ethnocomputing shows that 
sophisticated computational ideas emerge in all societies. 
Race and Design (Side 1). On the left, we 
outline what digital colonialism is and how it 
can be countered. On the right-hand side, we 
present design challenges that arise.
Race and Design (Side 2). In this spread 
we discuss emancipatory design, which 
requires values to remain in unalienated 
forms and to be circulated as opposed to 
extracted. We also explore integrative 
design, value-sensitive computational 
ethnography, generative justice, and 
cultural preservation.
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2021   INTERACTIONS   29DIALOGUES  STANDPOINT
Indigenous societies, however, embed their algorithms 
in egalitarian relationships and ecological sustainability. 
Western computing tears algorithms out of context. By 
repairing that epistemological damage—by developing 
CS as a tool for cultural respect, social equality, and 
environmental sustainability—we also increase the interest 
of underrepresented groups.
Ethnocomputing is of critical importance in AI, HCI, IoT, 
and other advanced applications. For example, Timnit Gebru 
is famed for her critiques of AI. But she has also promoted  AI 
when applied to cassava plant disease (https:/ /www.kaggle.
com/c/ammi-2020-convnets). Anyone who spends time in 
Africa understands the enormous importance of cassava 
to poor farmers, family recipes, and local food markets. 
University of Michigan School of Information alum Kwame 
Robinson [4] has applied AI to spotting kente cloth that has 
been created in factories but sold as handwoven. Culturally 
aware AI can improve low-income economies.
Attention to eliminating bias is necessary but incomplete. 
The average net income of white families is on average 10 
times that of Black families. That will not be changed by 
eliminating bias in who sees which stock investment ads. 
CS designers can aid underserved communities by opposing 
primitivist assumptions, making their cultural capital more 
fungible, and redesigning IoT, AI, HCI, and other CS fields to 
circulate unalienated value for all.
CONDUCTING RACIALLY INCLUSIVE  
RESEARCH IN HCI
Zinesters: Shamika Goddard, Cale Passmore,  
Naba Rizvi, and Alexandra To
With increased acknowledgment of the role played by race 
and racism in HCI, there is an increased need for caution 
in how science is conducted in regard to race. Establishing 
more-effective methods, shared vocabularies, and 
normalizing ethical practices around the incorporation of 
identities in science is essential. In 2016, Hankerson et al. 
[3] drew attention to how technology is racialized and often 
excludes people of color. In 2020, Ogbonnaya-Ogburu et al. [1] introduced a standard for using critical race theory in 
HCI—highlighting that leadership and representation in 
our field are predominantly white. In the past year, several 
institutions have extended hiring calls for scholars studying 
the intersection of race and technology. There are few 
resources available, however, to scholars to do this work. This 
zine responds to these calls to action by discussing specific, 
concrete practices for HCI researchers to conduct racially 
inclusive research. We introduce several core principles for 
conducting racially inclusive research, provide a vocabulary 
for centering the effects of power dynamics in our studies, 
provide a list of do’s and don’ts, and compile a list of resources 
for further study.
By defining the terms racism , racially inclusive , positionality , 
and intersectionality , we orient ourselves and our readers 
to the concepts with which our zine is acutely interested 
in engaging. The environments for research, both the labs 
that foster collaboration and innovation and the sites of 
research themselves, pose opportunities to engage with race 
and address or mitigate racism. Taken together, the terms, 
advice for labs, and guidance for research can help spark 
conversations and provoke changes that will equip HCI 
researchers who want to contribute scholarship informed by 
antiracist practices.
In the process of crafting this zine, we discussed 
several areas of research that require racially inclusive 
considerations, including: participant recruitment, forming 
community relationships, data analysis, incorporating race 
in the writing process, and forming research questions. In 
the first article, we focus on facilitating racially inclusive lab 
environments, as these environments are the starting point 
for antiracist science. Additionally, we provide examples 
of more individually racially inclusive practices. We hope 
this sparks further discussion in the aforementioned 
research areas and beyond. We also hope this zine can model 
practices for adapting theory toward making HCI a more 
welcome, equitable, and empowering space for BIPOC 
researchers and dispel fears and hesitation around speaking 
about race.
Conducting Racially Inclusive Research in HCI (Side 1). In this three-
column page, an introduction to the zine is provided in the left column. 
The middle column is a list of references. The right column includes 
the zine title and a list of authors.
Conducting Racially Inclusive Research in HCI (Side 2). In this three-
column page, terms are defined in the left column. In the middle 
column, we offer suggestions for creating racially inclusive research 
labs. In the right column are suggestions on how to conduct racially 
inclusive research.
@INTERACTIONSMAG
30   INTERACTIONS   SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2021COMPUTING EDUCATION PEDAGOGY
Zinesters: Bryan Dosono, Yolanda Rankin,  
and Khalia Braswell
The zine on computing education pedagogy examines the 
STEM pipeline and the ways in which race manifests in the 
classroom for students (e.g., affirmation of identity, cultural 
relevance of material, etc.). We share common faux pas as 
well as student success stories in educational environments. 
We also spotlight organizations that are already doing 
important work with racially marginalized students of all 
ages and levels. We offer provocations for race and ethnicity 
in HCI in establishing a computing identity.
Our zine provides instances where the modern computing 
curriculum falls short from a lack of cultural relevance, 
such as using the dominant group’s cultural practices and 
artifacts to ground learning activities (e.g., “The Tortoise 
and the Hare” story in Google’s CS First curriculum). 
An example of culturally relevant pedagogy may look 
like a student in an entry-level CS course leveraging her 
African heritage to share family recipes as an example of an 
algorithm (e.g., a student creates a website of family recipes 
indicative of African dishes).
Inclusive pedagogy serves an important role in 
broadening participation in computing. Students find a sense 
of belonging in how they learn and who they aim to become. 
Race and gender identity may play a role if students are “one 
of few” who look like them in a classroom. Instructors should 
advocate for using inclusive language:
• Replace master  and slave with main/primary  and replica/
secondary .
• Replace blacklist  and whitelist  with blocklist  and allowlist .
• Replace black hat and white hat with unethical  and ethical .The zine concludes with provocations for race and 
ethnicity in HCI. As algorithmic configurations in 
computing systems can reinforce bias that result in real 
consequences:
• How might we introduce topics like social computing 
and HCI earlier in CS education?
• How should we broaden participation in computing 
through existing programs?
• How do we build a pipeline of underrepresented 
students to join the professoriate?
UNDERSTANDING RACE AND IDENTITY
Zinesters: Adriana Alvarado Garcia,  
Marisol Wong-Villacres, and Ian Arawjo
Our group aimed to understand race and racism across 
borders. As we come from different parts of the world, 
our conversations surfaced some of the differences in 
the historical logics of race, the social apparatus, and the 
infrastructures that support, construct, and police race and 
racial identity in our countries. By sharing our experiences, 
we unpacked how such differences can contribute to HCI’s 
growing commitment to maintain issues of racism at the 
forefront of its discussions.
For example, one member of our group discussed 
Brazil’s long-held ideology of mestizaje , which champions 
“whitening” via mixing, and its effect on equity and 
inclusion initiatives in technology education. Programs such 
as affirmative action, which are critical for the U.S., are not 
as feasible in Brazil, where mestizaje pushes many people to 
adopt racial identities closer to whiteness. Mexico also has 
a long history of dismissing racial inequalities. It was not 
until 2020 that the Mexico census captured information 
Computing Education Pedagogy. In this zine teaser, we spotlight Digital Youth Divas, INTech, and America on Tech, organizations that are doing 
important STEM-related work with racially marginalized students of all ages and levels. We also highlight three main takeaways in regard to 
fostering greater inclusivity through computing education curricula.
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2021   INTERACTIONS   31DIALOGUES  STANDPOINT
on race for the first time and, more importantly, began 
recognizing the rights of Afro-Mexicans. Other contributors 
showed how immigrant HCI scholars in an ethnically and 
culturally homogeneous context such as Poland experience 
racial discrimination, framed and realized along ideas of 
nationalism and foreignness.
Our zine calls for scholars and practitioners to be 
mindful of how racial difference and politics are differently 
constructed as they continue their studies in race, racism, 
and HCI. The emerging explorations of race in HCI have 
promoted frameworks such as critical race theory (CRT) 
as rich analytical tools for advancing inclusive research 
and reducing the HCI community’s racial disparities. 
While CRT is important for advancing HCI’s tackling of race issues, we discussed how the theory arose from the 
U.S. historical experience with racism, particularly legal 
scholarship in the U.S., and how its language of identity 
often advances an implicit conflation between ascribed racial 
identification and personal identity [5]. Thus, the use of such 
perspectives may need to be reevaluated when understood 
in contexts outside the U.S. (e.g., [6]). Scholars within the 
U.S. should take note of this intercultural perspective 
by attending to racialization—that is, how a description 
becomes a classification—and avoid forcing racial identities 
on people in the name of diversity and inclusion. The 
same can apply when we act as reviewers, asking authors 
for positionality statements where we might expect a 
particular form of self-identification that is familiar to us. 
Devoting efforts to such careful reflection can contribute to 
racial justice efforts that counteract the anti-Blackness of 
computing worldwide.
REPORTING ON RACE IN RESEARCH
Zinesters: Carol F. Scott, Daniel Gardner,  
Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya-Ogburu, and Jakita Thomas
Our final zine offers guidance to HCI researchers, 
practitioners, and designers in considering race and the 
implications of race throughout their research process. We 
provide an infographic as a starting point for reflecting on 
race at every stage of research.
Issues of race can influence every  facet of any HCI project. 
We propose questions to encourage the HCI community to 
consider how diverse perspectives are, could be, or should be 
considered in the development and implementation of their 
work. We suggest that everyone can and should reflect on the 
role that diverse communities, who may be most affected, 
Reporting on 
Race in Research. 
This spread 
highlights a 
process flow 
with regard to 
reporting race. 
We begin by 
asking if we have 
established our 
positionality 
(see top center 
square, outlined 
in red). We then 
ask a series 
of questions 
to consider in 
order to ensure 
our research is 
accessible to and 
conscious of the 
communities it 
affects.
Understanding Race and Identity. Race isn’t the same everywhere, and 
neither is antiracism. Here, we discuss how to avoid assuming your 
racial identification of someone is their identity, a key way that racism 
functions.
@INTERACTIONSMAG
32   INTERACTIONS   SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2021could have in the collection and articulation of data. We ask 
everyone to consider how accessible the knowledge being 
produced will be to those same communities.
Rather than prescribing solutions, we provide questions 
that researchers can use to generate their own answers. 
Our team is made up of scholars based in North America, 
positioned within specific racial histories and tensions of 
that region, and our own individual (subject) positions. Our 
individual answers to these questions vary.
The infographic shown here attempts to distill themes 
already present in critical HCI and adjacent communities to 
support more reflexive, inclusive, equitable, and community-
driven practices. Scholars have interrogated how HCI can 
integrate critical feminist and gendered analysis [7], and 
have highlighted how those least included should be treated 
as “experts.” Still, others are interrogating how concepts of 
race influence technological research and design [1].
Rigorous, sensitive, and inclusive research requires 
investigators to consider the broader histories, expertise, 
and lived experiences of those most affected by their work. 
Our infographic encourages researchers to identify racial 
implications within their work and to consider insights 
from critical race studies and/or consult with critical race 
scholars. Racial trauma–informed research [8], for example, 
is an important stride toward inclusive, equitable HCI. 
During data collection, HCI researchers are encouraged to 
collaborate with and consult stakeholder communities on 
coding and/or statistical groupings to define identities or 
groupings in emic terms. During their analysis, researchers 
are asked to consider nondominant ways of knowing that 
center the voices, lived experiences, and expertise of studied 
populations. We encourage community-driven approaches 
that permit researching and designing with  rather than 
for, permit learning together, and validate and potentially 
transform the experiences of all involved. Lastly, our 
infographic suggests the HCI community must intentionally 
address these questions and continually reevaluate our work 
and our own privileges and positionality [9].
CONCLUSION
Our zines demonstrate that engaging with race in HCI can 
be a generative and empowering process. We aimed to create 
an atmosphere that uplifted voices of color, challenged our 
assumptions about HCI, and encouraged conversations that 
might produce concrete tools to share with our community. 
How can we incorporate disparate global understandings 
of race/isms into our practice? What opportunities can we 
discover when we treat race as a source of cultural richness 
and strength, as in the case of ethnocomputing? What are 
the limitations of reifying race? How might we start to 
address historical racial inequality within our institutions? 
How can people with power and/or in the majority be 
accomplices in the push for racial justice?
Within each of these conversations, we can see the 
messiness of race. As we continue this work, we will 
encounter both points of tension and disagreement 
and more of the opportunities uncovered here. An 
intersectional framing might encourage us to embrace this 
messiness so that we can uplift one another’s dignity as 
complex peoples as well as hold one another accountable. Or, maybe the deployment of intersectionality might itself 
be a point of contention [9]. Despite our differences, we 
share an understanding that racism and anti-Blackness 
remain everyday destructive forces across the world, and 
that it is not the race of people that causes harm such as 
attrition from computing, but rather the racism of those 
around them.
To transform HCI and halt its reproduction of racism 
and inequity, we have to engage at both the institutional 
and individual level. We must reenvision what computing 
produces and ensure that underserved communities—not 
just tech corporations—benefit from its productions and 
systemic effects. We call on scholars as well as Interactions  
readers who may or may not be outside the academy or 
outside of research, particularly those who identify as white, 
to reflect on their complicity in structures of oppression 
and engage honestly in the vast literature on race/ism and 
to translate their learning into antiracist practice in their 
institutions and daily lives. Once they have taken these 
important steps, we invite them to join us in discussing race/
ism as we go forward, together, to forge a more inclusive HCI.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge and thank the participants of the 
Engaging Race in HCI workshop. We are appreciative of 
your willingness to be vulnerable and honest in navigating 
these often exhausting conversations. Additionally, we 
thank SIGCHI for its sponsorship of the workshop through 
the Development Fund grant. This article was originally 
curated by Yolanda Rankin for the Designing at the 
Intersections forum.
Endnotes
1. Ogbonnaya-Ogburu, I.F., Smith, A.D.R., To, A., and Toyama, K. 
Critical race theory for HCI. Proc. of the 2020 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems.  ACM, New York, 2020, 1–16.
2. Smith, A.D.R. et al. What’s race got to do with it? Engaging in race in 
HCI. Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, 2020.
3. Hankerson, D., Marshall, A.R., Booker, J., El Mimouni, H., Walker, 
I., and Rode, J.A. Does technology have race? Proc. of the 2016 CHI 
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems.  ACM, New York, 473–486.
4. Robinson, K.P., Eglash, R., Bennett, A., Nandakumar, S., and Robert, 
L. Authente-Kente: Enabling authentication for artisanal economies 
with deep learning. AI & SOCIETY 36 , 1 (2021), 369–379.
5. Brubaker, R. and Cooper, F. Beyond ‘identity.’ Theory and Society 29 , 
1 (2000), 1–47.
6. Gilroy, P. Postcolonial Melancholia.  Columbia Univ. Press, 2005.
7. Scheuerman, M.K., Spiel, K., Haimson, O.L, Hamidi, F., and 
Branham, S.M. HCI guidelines for gender equity and inclusivity. 
UMBC Faculty Collection, 2020.
8. Williams, M.T., Metzger, I.W., Leins, C., and DeLapp, C. Assessing 
racial trauma within a DSM–5 framework: The UConn Racial/Ethnic 
Stress & Trauma Survey. Practice Innovations 3 , 4 (2018), 242–260.
9. Nash, J.C. Black Feminism Reimagined: After Intersectionality. Duke 
Univ. Press, 2018.
The Race in HCI Collective  authors of this article are: Angela D. R. Smith  
(angdanro@gmail.com), Adriana Alvarado Garcia , Ian Arawjo ,  
Audrey Bennett , Khalia Braswell , Bryan Dosono , Ron Eglash ,  
Denae Ford , Daniel Gardner , Shamika Goddard , Jaye Nias , Cale Passmore ,  
Yolanda Rankin , Naba Rizvi , Carol F. Scott , Jakita Thomas , Alexandra To , 
Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya-Ogburu , and Marisol Wong-Villacres .
DOI: 10.1145/3477097 © 2021 ACM 1072-5520/21/09 $15.00
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2021   INTERACTIONS   33