The Equality, Diversity and Inclusion Cards – Introduction and
Work in Progress
Peter J. Craigon (he/ him)
University of Nottingham
peter.craigon4@nottingham.ac.ukDebra Fearnshaw (she/her)
University of Nottingham
Debra.fearnshaw@nottingham.ac.uk
Oliver J. Fisher (he/him)
University of Surrey
o.fisher@surrey.ac.ukEmma Hadfield-Hudson (she/her)
National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR)
emma.hadfield-hudson@nihr.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
This extended abstract presents the Equality, Diversity and Inclu-
sion (EDI) cards. These cards seek to enable researchers to engage
with questions around Equality, Diversity and Inclusion in their
work, This piece is descriptive in nature and will cover the struc-
ture of the deck, the layout of an individual card and two ways in
which the cards have been initially tested. The intention is for this
overview to introduce the cards to the TAS audience and provide
an opportunity to get hands on with the cards. This will accompany
the presentation of the poster. Please take a look through the cards
presented alongside this poster and ask any questions or provide
any feedback to the presenter.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Social and professional topics →User characteristics; Race and
ethnicity; Religious orientation; Gender; Men; Gender; Women;
Sexual orientation; People with disabilities; Geographic charac-
teristics; Cultural characteristics; Age; Children; Age; Seniors;
Age; Adolescents.
ACM Reference Format:
Peter J. Craigon (he/ him), Debra Fearnshaw (she/her), Oliver J. Fisher
(he/him), and Emma Hadfield-Hudson (she/her). 2023. The Equality, Di-
versity and Inclusion Cards – Introduction and Work in Progress. In First
International Symposium on Trustworthy Autonomous Systems (TAS ’23), July
11–12, 2023, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 7 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3597512.3597515
1 INTRODUCTION
Issues of Equality Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) are becoming in-
creasingly prominent and important[1], yet methods for engaging
with such issues in research design and delivery are lacking. In-
spired by the model of the Moral-IT cards [ 2] the Connected Every-
thing Network Plus (EP/S036113/1), with support from the Future
Food Beacon of Excellence at the University of Nottingham, set out
to develop a card-based tool to enable researchers and stakeholders
to engage with questions around how their work may promote
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
TAS ’23, July 11–12, 2023, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
©2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0734-6/23/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3597512.3597515equity and increase inclusion or have a negative impact towards
one or more groups and reflect on how this can be overcome.
Connected Everything is an Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council (EPSRC) funded Network Plus that aims to cre-
ate an inclusive and diverse community of multidisciplinary re-
searchers and industrialists to address key challenges associated
with the future of digital manufacturing. Research networks are
vital to the research ecosystem, creating valuable opportunities for
researchers (especially early career researchers) to develop their
own partnerships with both academics and industrialists, progress
their careers and enable new areas of scientific discovery. Since
Connected Everything formation in 2016, the network has been
committed embedding EDI in all its network activities in order to
encourage, support and respect ideas from everyone and ensure the
inclusive activities are representative of our network’s community.
Learnings from developing strategies to improve EDI considera-
tions within the research ecosystem, helped Connected Everything
identify a gap in the tools/methods/frameworks available for re-
searchers to engage with EDI within their research.
The starting point for this work is to provide a tool to ask and
help researchers answer questions such as:
•how inclusive is your work?
•who does it include or exclude and how?
•how does Equality, Diversity and Inclusion relate to you and
your work?
These questions link to wider questions of Responsible (Research
and) Innovation (RRI) such as whether a technology or innovation
is societally desirable, ethically acceptable and sustainable[3]. for
example, issues of growing prominence and significance within the
Trustworthy Autonomous Systems (TAS) community and technol-
ogy development more widely. Card- based tools also having been
developed in this area see [ 2] for more examples. Although highly
relevant to RRI the EDI cards are intended not solely as an RRI tool
with intended wider applications.
This work is ongoing and the cards and development process
will be reported in more detail in future work. The purpose of
this poster is to introduce the cards to a wider TAS audience and
provide a hands-on opportunity to experience the cards which is
intended to accompany the presentation of this poster. Please take
a look through the cards presented alongside this poster and ask
any questions or provide any feedback to the presenter.TAS ’23, July 11–12, 2023, Edinburgh, United Kingdom Peter Craigon et al.
2 THE EQUALITY, DIVERSITY AND
INCLUSION (EDI) CARDS
Equality, Diversity and Inclusion literature from various sources
including the University of Nottingham along with the knowledge
and experience of the team informed the development of a deck
structure of themes and categories for the cards. The project team
then refined this further in order to provide the overall deck struc-
ture for the prototype EDI cards deck as described below.
2.1 Deck Structure
The prototype deck consists of 145 cards divided into 4 themes and
12 categories. These are shown in table 1 below and illustrated in
section 2.3.2.2 Anatomy of a Card
Within these categories each card is designed to look as follows (fig
1) and as can be seen in figures 1-13 below:.
•At the top is an image which illustrates the card, intends to
provoke reflection and provide an alternative perspective of
the issue stated on the card.
•Underneath the image is the title of the card which identifies
and names the issue.
•Then follows the text, which is intended to explain what the
card means in terms of Equality, Diversity and Inclusion.
•Below this explanation is an open question which is intended
to encourage people to put the concept of the card in the
Figure 1: – An example of an individual cardThe Equality, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) Cards TAS ’23, July 11–12, 2023, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Table 1: – Summary of the Themes and Categories of the EDI in Research cards
Theme Category (Number of cards)
Definitions Definitions (7)
Legal Definitions (9)
Scenario Protected Characteristics (9)
Other Characteristics (13)
Activity or Context (20)
Inclusion or Exclusion (15)
Industrial Digital Technologies (9)
What am I going to do? Approach (20)
Measures of Success (8)
Complications and Practicalities Complications (16)
Uncomfortable Questions (11)
Digital Manufacturing Challenges (8)
context of their own work in a way to encourage people to
find out more if needed.
•Each card is categorised by colour and name with this shown
at the bottom of the card and on the back of the card, as
shown in figures 1-13
2.3 Card Themes and Categories
The 145 cards are divided into 4 themes and 12 categories as follows:
2.3.1 Definitions. The definitions cards are intended to enable
users to understand what is meant by different elements of Equality,
Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) and to provide working definitions.
Definitions. These cards intended to clarify what is meant by
EDI by providing working definitions.(fig 2)
Figure 2: – As an example the Equality Card from the Defini-
tions category in the Definitions themeLegal Definitions. These cards are intended to help people un-
derstand the legal elements of EDI from the UK Equality Act 2010
[4] (fig 3)
Figure 3: – As an example the Protected Characteristics Card
from the Legal Definitions category in the Definitions themeTAS ’23, July 11–12, 2023, Edinburgh, United Kingdom Peter Craigon et al.
2.3.2 Scenario. The scenario cards are intended to encourage users
to identify elements of their own work and those groups that may
be impacted from an EDI perspective.
Protected Characteristics. These cards summarise the Protected
Characteristics from the UK Equality Act 2010 [4] (fig 4)
Figure 4: – As an example the Disability card from the Pro-
tected Characteristics category in the Scenario theme
Other Characteristics. These cards are intended to help people
consider EDI beyond the Protected Characteristics and consider
other groups. (fig 5)
Figure 5: - As an example the Physical Characteristics card
from the Other characteristics category in the Scenario theme
Activity or Context. These cards are intended to help people
highlight areas where EDI issues may occur in relation to their
work. (fig 6)
Figure 6: - As an example the Research Methods Card from
the Activity or Context category in the Scenario theme
Inclusion or Exclusion. These cards are intended to help people
understand a range of ways in which people may be included or
excluded. (fig 7)
Figure 7: - As an example the Bias Card from the Inclusion
or exclusion category in the Scenario theme
Industrial Digital Technologies. These cards are intended to en-
able consideration of EDI in the context of Digital Manufacturing
for Connected Everything (original funder of the card develop-
ment). They are intended to highlight a range of technologies to
help people consider potential impacts. (fig 8)The Equality, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) Cards TAS ’23, July 11–12, 2023, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Figure 8: - As an example the Artificial Intelligence and Ma-
chine Learning Card from the Industrial Digital Technologies
category in the Scenario theme
2.3.3 What am I going to do? The ‘What am I going to do?’ theme
contains a number of potential approaches which may help users
identify measures to improve issues of EDI.
Approach. These cards are intended to help people identify po-
tential approaches to improve EDI in relation to their work. (fig
9)
Figure 9: - As an example the Representation card from the
Approach category in the What am I going to do? Theme
Measures of Success. These cards are intended to help people
decide how actions to improve EDI may be assessed or measured.
(fig 10)
Figure 10: - As an example the Goals and Aims card from the
Measures of Success category in the What am I going to do?
theme
2.3.4 Complications and Practicalities. The cards in this theme aim
to promote discussion and help users engage with the complications
and practicalities of EDI.
Complications. These cards are intended to help people iden-
tify, engage with and mitigate elements which may complicate
improvements in EDI. (fig 11)
Figure 11: - As an example the Time card from the Complica-
tions category in the Complications and Practicalities them
Uncomfortable Questions. These cards are intended to help people
engage with questions that they may feel uncomfortable about in
relation to EDI. (fig 12)TAS ’23, July 11–12, 2023, Edinburgh, United Kingdom Peter Craigon et al.
Figure 12: - As an example the Avoidance card from the Un-
comfortable questions category in the Complications and
Practicalities theme
Digital Manufacturing Challenges. These cards are intended to
help people identify some of the EDI challenges specific to digital
manufacturing research. (fig 13)
Figure 13: - As an example the Legacy Systems card from the
Digital Manufacturing challenges category in the complica-
tions and practicalities theme
3 USE SCENARIOS AND TESTING
To conduct the initial tests of these cards we devised and trialed
two example use cases (with the intention that users would have
the flexibility to develop many more of their own). We tested this in
two initial pilot workshops online via the online whiteboard Miro
(www.miro.com) with participants drawn from the wider project
and networks. Physical card sets have also been printed to be usedin face to face sessions and have been distributed to a small pool of
interested parties for their own use and testing.
3.1 Random Draw
In this use case, a card was drawn in turn at random from each
of the four themes: Definitions, Scenario, What am I going to do?
and Complications and Practicalities. With each card drawn the
participants were invited to reflect and discuss their experience
in relation to the topic area and how issues of Equality, Diversity
and Inclusion may manifest. With each subsequent card drawn the
participants were asked to reflect on how this combined with the
previous cards and what issues of EDI were relevant. Ultimately
this resulted in a full discussion based on the overall combination of
cards drawn, the relevant EDI issues and the user’s own experience.
Figure 14: – Cards drawn during a random draw exercise
3.2 ‘EDI by Design’
Based on a use case of the Moral-IT cards [ 2] the participants were
then asked to conduct a task labelled ‘EDI by Design’. For this,
as a group, the participants were asked to define a technology or
research project. They were then asked to pick cards to identify:
•positive EDI aspects of the project and any potential negative
EDI aspects,
•ways of maximising the positives and minimising/mitigating
the negatives
•practical challenges of the measures identified.
They were asked to annotate their choices to explain their think-
ing as shown in Figure 15. The reflection and group discussion
prompted by this exercise was key. The intention being that this
exercise could be replicated and inserted into research projects or
technology development in order to identify and design in ways
that improved the inclusivity of the research or technology devel-
opment.
4 OUTCOMES AND NEXT STEPS
We were pleased that the participants in these initial trials were
able to complete the tasks and effectively use the cards to facilitate
discussion and reflection. This was reinforced by positive feedback
(e.g., participants seeing the relevance of EDI to their work when
they did not before, or learning from the discussions) from partici-
pants about their experience of using the cards and how the cards
promoted engagement with issues of EDI. Further details of the
development of the cards and the results from these pilots will be
the subject of forthcoming publications.
These cards are a prototype and they have only been subject to
small scale pilot studies. Further work is required to develop and
refine the cards and their content with a wider range of audiences.The Equality, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) Cards TAS ’23, July 11–12, 2023, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Figure 15: – an example completed grid for the ‘EDI by Design’
exercise
We continue to use and test the cards and have been encouraged
by how they have been received. We have found a keen interest
from people to continue development and testing of our work.
To aid this process we identified the need to produce a guide to
enable users to interact with the cards independently based on
their individual needs. We also identified the need to make the
cards widely available. We therefore plan to develop and make the
cards available via a web app and via the internet which shouldincrease usability. Accessibility has also been important to our
development and we plan to make the cards compatible with screen
reader software. These pieces of work are ongoing alongside further
testing and use of the cards to refine them further.
For more detail a recording of a presentation and a link
to download a pdf of the cards can be found from here
https://connectedeverything.ac.uk/equality-diversity-and-
inclusion/
Please take a look through the cards presented alongside this
poster and ask any questions or provide any feedback to the pre-
senter.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project was funded by Connected Everything an Engineer-
ing and Physical Sciences Research Council Network Plus [grant
number EP/S036113/1], supported by the Future Food Beacon of
excellence at the University of Nottingham and the TAS project
and University of Nottingham.
Images on the cards sourced from Pixabay.com.
REFERENCES
[1]K. Guyan, F.D. Oloyede, Equality, diversity and inclusion in research and innova-
tion: UK review, 2019
[2]Lachlan D. Urquhart and Peter J. Craigon. 2021. The Moral-IT Deck: a tool for
ethics by design. J. Responsible Innov. 8, 1 (January 2021), 94–126. DOI:https:
//doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2021.1880112~
[3]Rene Von Schomberg. 2011. Towards Responsible Research and Innovation in
the Information and Communication Technologies and Security Technologies
Fields. SSRN (2011). Retrieved November 26, 2021 from https://papers.ssrn.com/
abstract$=$2436399
[4]The Equality Act 2010 Available at https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/
contents accessed November 2021