Sexuality in adolescence: A look into the future of new
generations
Blanca Rocío Espinazo-López
University of Salamanca, Spain,
blancaespl20@usal.es
Marta Fernández-Aquerreta
University of Salamanca, Spain
martafer@usal.esSara Gemio-Barrantes
University of Salamanca, Spain
saragemiob@usal.es
Sonia Verdugo-Castro
GRIAL Research Group, Research Institute for Educational
Sciences, University of Salamanca 37008, Salamanca, Spain
soniavercas@usal.esMa Cruz Sánchez-Gómez
GRIAL Research Group, University of Salamanca 37008,
Salamanca, Spain
mcsago@usal.es
ABSTRACT
Introduction: The literature reveals a lack of knowledge on young
people about the concept of sexuality and its background. This
lack of knowledge, added to the social influences that generate
pressure on boys and girls, leads to risky behaviour. Objective:
This work aims to find out about issues related to sexuality among
adolescents that occur in multimedia environments. Also, to com-
plete the study, the aim is to determine what adolescents think
about sexuality and sexual health. The research questions are as
follows: (1) What do adolescents know about sexual health, (2)
Are programmes and interventions being carried out to provide
adolescents with information about sexuality, and (3) Is sexuality
currently a taboo subject? Method: The study was carried out using
qualitative methodology and the phenomenological method, and
non-participant observation and semi-structured interviews were
used as techniques. Results: As a result, it has been obtained those
adolescents consult virtual environments for information; how-
ever, not all the information is helpful and adequate. Conclusions:
The conclusion is that there is a need to promote intervention pro-
grammes and sex education as a normalised subject and eliminate
existing taboos.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Social and professional topics ;•User characteristics ;•Age;
•Adolescents ;
KEYWORDS
Adolescence, sexuality, sexuality education
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
TEEM’21, October 26–29, 2021, Barcelona, Spain
©2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9066-8/21/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3486011.3486424ACM Reference Format:
Blanca Rocío Espinazo-López, University of Salamanca, Spain, blancae-
spl20@usal.es, Marta Fernández-Aquerreta, Sara Gemio-Barrantes, Sonia
Verdugo-Castro, and Ma Cruz Sánchez-Gómez. 2021. Sexuality in adoles-
cence: A look into the future of new generations. In Ninth International Con-
ference on Technological Ecosystems for Enhancing Multiculturality (TEEM’21)
(TEEM’21), October 26–29, 2021, Barcelona, Spain. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3486011.3486424
1 INTRODUCTION
Studies of sexuality in adolescents are an area of interest [ 5]. To
delve deeper into the subject, Rodríguez-Mármol et al. (2016) [ 8]
seek to understand adolescents’ knowledge and attitudes about
sexuality. Their work concludes that there is a notable lack of
knowledge and awareness of sexually transmitted diseases and
contraceptive methods. In addition, some of the adolescents in their
study showed risky sexual behaviour. Studies such as that of Sagaró
del Campo & Moraga Rodríguez (2015) [ 9] also confirm the lack of
knowledge about sexuality and its involvement. Throughout the
study, the concept of male supremacy is even presented among the
participants due to the stereotypical constructs of society.
Based on the study by Hernández Machín et al. (2014) [ 3], it
was detected that the age at which sexual relations are initiated is
decreasing. Among the consequences of entering into sexuality at
an early age without sufficient information are sexually transmitted
diseases, unwanted pregnancies, etc. It is, therefore, necessary to
devote more efforts to sex education. Furthermore, it is worrying
that 16.4% of those surveyed did not use contraceptive methods
[3]. Hence the need to strengthen educational programmes that
respond to the sexual needs of adolescents.
On the other hand, some authors consider that the differences
observed in the frequency of sexual activity reported by men and
women may be due to a tendency for men to exaggerate their sexual
experience and for women to hide aspects of this sphere of their
lives [6].
Finally, we conclude with a study on sexuality in adolescents [ 7],
whose objective was to identify the particularities and knowledge
about sexuality in adolescents. The results showed the existence of
early onset of sexual relations and little knowledge about contra-
ceptive methods.
83TEEM’21, October 26–29, 2021, Barcelona, Spain Blanca Rocío Espinazo-López et al.
For all of these reasons, this study was carried out to find out
about issues related to sexuality among adolescents that occur
in multimedia environments. In addition, to complete the study,
the aim is to find out what adolescents think about sexuality and
sexual health. Therefore, the research questions are as follows: (1)
What do adolescents know about sexual health, (2) Are programmes
and interventions being implemented to provide adolescents with
information about sexuality, and (3) Is sexuality currently a taboo
subject?
2 METHODOLOGY AND METHOD
This work has been carried out within the Degree in Social Educa-
tion framework at the University of Salamanca (Spain). Qualitative
methodology was used for the development of the research [ 11]. In
addition, the phenomenological method was applied [ 12]. The aim
was to find out what is transmitted in multimedia environments
about adolescent sexuality. Also, to complete the study, speeches
were collected to discover young people’s opinions on sexual health.
Two techniques were used for data collection, non-participant
observation and semi-structured interviews. The data have been
collected during the last quarter of 2020 and are gathered from
two spreadsheets at the link https://cutt.ly/mbB2nqg. In addition,
data have been collected from multimedia spaces, and several semi-
structured interviews with young men and women have also been
applied. In multimedia environments, searches were launched with
different equations of terms and the different results were read
and viewed. Subsequently, 90 items have been selected, as they can
answer the objective and research questions of the study. Finally, 90
elements were analysed: 16 articles, 5 podcats, 16 blogs, 7 YouTube
videos, 3 Instagram profiles, 3 series (Sex Education, Euphoria and
Big Mouth), 35 news items (ABC, La Vanguardia, El Mundo, El País,
etc.), various tweets, short films and 1 YouTube channel.
2.1 Data analysis
The content analysis has been applied in different stages. Firstly, the
multimedia environments to be observed were selected, including
textual and audiovisual elements. People were also chosen to partic-
ipate in the semi-structured interviews, following the criterion that
they should be young people. After content extraction, the multi-
media data and the discourses of the semi-structured interviews
have been organised in different files. These results were collected
in spreadsheets (https://cutt.ly/mbB2nqg.. Then, the multimedia
data were organised based on a system of meta-categories, cate-
gories and subcategories, extracting the main concepts discussed
in the content. And the discourses have been ordered according
to the questions. This was possible because, based on the reading
of the speeches and the viewing of the contents, the data was re-
duced through the categorical system. Once this system had been
designed, the CAQDAS webQDA was used to generate the code
tree, and the discourses were coded. After the coding process, a
content analysis was applied, from which a word cloud was derived
[10].3 RESULTS
As shown in Figure 1, the conceptual map, meta-categories, cate-
gories, and sub-categories have been defined. This analysis presents
the main results obtained by category.
On the analysis of the multimedia environments, Figure 2
presents the frequencies of coding of the content in the categories.
Based on the content analysed through the items studied, multi-
media publications, and the coding, data on experiences have been
extracted. Adolescence about sex education is defined as a phase
of discovering sexual identity; it transforms from child to adult.
Furthermore, the family and the school being two main agents of
socialisation, it is necessary to address sex education from child-
hood, promoting healthy and egalitarian sexual relations.
The average age at which adolescents start having sex is be-
tween 12 and 17 years old, and young people think they know
everything about sexuality, but in reality, sexuality is a little talked
about and addressed in the family and school environment. This
leads young people, especially boys, to consult the information
about sexuality, sometimes on inappropriate websites linked to
pornography. In addition, gender roles and sexual roles are repro-
duced in society, which is discriminatory towards women and in
some respects towards men. An example of this, as mentioned
above, is that men consume pornography to satisfy their instinc-
tive needs, while women do so to learn what is expected of them.
On the other hand, the content taught to minors is that women
are at the disposal of men, which encourages unequal sexuality,
with the risk that one of the parties may force the other. All of
this leads to young people being able to have an active sexual life
without affective responsibility, empathy, and a loss of communica-
tion and values. Sexuality with these deficiencies can lead to sexual
relations without active listening and respect between the parties.
Concerning preventive methods, 80% of adolescents recognise that
they did not receive any sexual education or that it was not suffi-
cient, so affective-sexual education is necessary and changing the
conception of pornography, sexuality, and relationships.
On the other hand, violence is normalised in society. It is not
uncommon for violent content to appear in films, video games, etc.
Furthermore, it is also normalised to hide the fact that one has
suffered or suffers violence due to feelings of shame and guilt. Also,
the consumption of pornography can lead to risky behaviour or
gender inequality, leading to violence in the couple, which means
that there are more and more cases of violence in young couples,
with psychological violence being the most common at this stage.
Finally, emphasising the psychosocial approach to sexuality, many
specialists see the need to incorporate affective-sexual education.
In this way, young people would have rigorous and trustworthy
information and learn to detect violent or abusive behaviour; it
is also essential to work with young people to manage emotions,
conflict resolution, communication, assertiveness, and sexuality in
values. It is also necessary to apply modelling by their role models
to transmit strategies for using this essential sexuality and affective
responsibility principles.
In addition to this, it is also necessary to provide counselling,
support and sexual and couple psychotherapy for those young peo-
ple who need it. If prevention and sexuality education programmes
are provided from the earliest stages, the intervention will be more
84Sexuality in adolescence: A look into the future of new generations TEEM’21, October 26–29, 2021, Barcelona, Spain
Figure 1: Conceptual map. Source: Own production based on webQDA.
Figure 2: Frequencies of categories. Source: Own production.
effective. In relation to the frequencies of coding on the categories
of preventive methods, programmes at school and sexual health pro-
motion programmes stand out. The results show that there is still
some way to go in the school environment, given that the academic
sphere is, together with the family, one of the first environments in
which a person develops. The results also show a slight increase,
at present, with respect to sexual health promotion programmes,
which provide young people with the necessary tools to promote
healthy and consensual interpersonal relationships.As shown in Figure 3, physical violence is the most coded in terms
of types of violence. While physical violence is easier to identify
because of physical evidence, psychological violence is socially less
evident and more difficult to detect and prove; however, it stands
out in the coding because of the social concern it generates. Taboos
about violence need to be eradicated so that victims can tell about it,
feeling liberated, understood, protected and not judged. Thirdly, the
type of violence that has received the most codifications is verbal
violence, which manifests itself through humiliation, humiliation
and insults in private and public. However, it is a type of violence
85TEEM’21, October 26–29, 2021, Barcelona, Spain Blanca Rocío Espinazo-López et al.
Figure 3: Frequencies of types of violence. Source: Own production.
Figure 4: Frequencies of the psychosocial approach. Source: Own production.
that is not usually reported, given that it is socially normalised.
Finally, the least coded type of violence is economic violence, one
of the least reported.
About the psychosocial approach to adolescent sexuality, it is
perceived that awareness and prevention capacity has recently in-
creased to sexual health and sexual health problems through various
approaches, strategies, such as publicity campaigns and resources
provided through social networks, etc. However, it is also worth
mentioning that it is about initiatives and implementation, which
should be further promoted. Figure 4 presents the codifications of
the different approaches.
Among the series analysed, first of all, there is Sex Education. The
first admirable value of the series lies in the fact that it deals with
sexuality literally, without taboos, which can be seen both in the
protagonists’ language and in the scenes of the series. It becomes
the kind of sex education that was not given to many other people
in its, in some cases, not so distant era. The issue of homosexuality
is dealt with in the series, from acceptance to the other extreme,
with mockery, hatred, violence, etc., being present among some ofthe characters. On the other hand, there is an emphasis on sexual
abuse, with the theme of "no is no" as a banner. In addition, female
masturbation becomes as common a practice as male masturbation.
Finally, three lessons are present throughout the series: "no one
should judge anyone", "there is no such thing as a standard sexual
relationship", and "we are all normal and different" [4].
Secondly, the series entitled Big Mouth [ 1] delves into one of
today’s taboo subjects: puberty and sex. It is done comically and
boldly. The main characters are boys and girls around the age of
13; each one of them will show the beginnings of adolescence and
puberty and their concerns about the hormonal changes typical of
the age, sexual abuse, pornography, homosexuality, menstruation,
etc. differently. It also shows the part related to sexual attraction,
first loves or the jealousy that this entails and an image of an
empowered and free woman.
Thirdly, the series Euphoria (ABC, 2019) [ 21] explores the main
problems of young people, including male violence in couples, toxic
relationships, the dangers of social networks and how to be a trans
teenager: from fetishism in sex to acceptance in the classroom and
86Sexuality in adolescence: A look into the future of new generations TEEM’21, October 26–29, 2021, Barcelona, Spain
aggression for being a woman. As far as sexuality is concerned,
there is a scene in which one of the protagonists tries to suffocate
the girl with whom he is having sex for the first time, motivated
by his friends, claiming that she "is a slut and I’m sure she likes
it". This brings up the debate about consent in relationships, which
is very present in the current juvenile scene. The series brings a
level of reality worth mentioning compared to others of its time,
covering a wide range of different fields.
On the other hand, Table 1 shows some of the contents regarding
the results of the interviews.
4 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Responding to the research questions posed, about the first one, on
how much adolescents know about sexual health, a significant lack
of knowledge and awareness deficit related to sexually transmitted
diseases has been detected, thus leading to risky behaviours in
sexual relations [ 8]. On the other hand, there is a great lack of
knowledge about the concepts of sex and gender, and most social
constructs depend on the education received and the influences
acquired throughout life. Moreover, women have more excellent
knowledge about these issues [9].
Regarding the second research question, on programmes that
are being carried out, the literature argues that it is necessary to
strive for educational programmes that respond to the sexual needs
of adolescents and thus avoid risks in sexual relations. On the
other hand, it is required to develop positive youth programmes
to promote adequate capacities and foster healthy skills in both
the social and behavioural spheres and favour good knowledge.
Furthermore, it is necessary to intervene from an early age and the
family and school, as they are the primary agents of socialisation.
Regarding the third question, it has been detected those sex-
ual relations and all that they imply are taboo subjects in society,
not only among adolescents. To the above, this leads to the exis-
tence of early onset of sexual relations and little knowledge about
contraceptive methods [ 7]. Therefore, good affective-sexual educa-
tion is necessary. Furthermore, it is concluded that sexuality must
be normalised, as it is present in the lives of all people, not just
adolescents.On the other hand, it is perceived that adolescents need to in-
crease their knowledge of sexual health and develop in-depth skills
and attitudes for maintaining good sexual relationships to have
healthy, positive, and quality relationships. Stigmatisation is also
latent, based on gender roles and stereotypes that mark society.
This is an issue to be addressed, given that all the information ac-
quired from an early age can condition for or against the optimal
development of the person and conditioning social interaction and
the way of perceiving reality.
Finally, qualitative research brings an approach that highlights
people’s perceptions, concerns and experiences, thus shedding light
on new perspectives.
REFERENCES
[1]“Big Mouth”, análisis de una serie sobre la revolución hormonal.: 2017. https:
//psicopico.com/big-mouth-analisis-una-serie-la-revolucion-hormonal/. Ac-
cessed: 2021-06-30.
[21] «Euphoria», en el punto de mira: ¿por qué es tan polémica? 2019.
https://www.abc.es/play/series/noticias/abci-euphoria-punto-mira-polemica-
201907010055_noticia.html. Accessed: 2021-05-17.
[3]Hernández Machín, L.E. et al. 2014. Evaluación del nivel de conocimientos de
jóvenes adolescentes sobre sexualidad. Revista de Ciencias Médicas de Pinar del
Río. 18, 1 (2014), 33–44.
[4]La verdadera razón por la que todos los “millennials” deberían ver “Sex Education”:
2019. https://www.cosmopolitan.com/es/famosos/peliculas-series/a26071636/
sex-education-opiniones/. Accessed: 2021-05-17.
[5]Lescaille Riverí, B. et al. 2009. Valoración de la sexualidad en la adolescencia a
partir de los estereotipos sexuales. MEDISAN . 13, 2 (2009), 0–0.
[6] Pacheco-Sánchez, C.I. et al. 2007. Significaciones de la sexualidad y salud repro-
ductiva en adolescentes de Bogotá. Salud Pública de México . 49, 1 (2007), 45–51.
[7]Puentes Rizo, E. et al. 2012. La sexualidad en adolescentes de la secundaria básica
“Viet Nam.” Revista Cubana de Medicina General Integral . 28, 4 (2012), 599–610.
[8]Rodríguez Mármol, M. et al. 2016. Conocimientos y actitudes sobre sexualidad
en adolescentes de primer curso de Grado en Educación Infantil y Primaria de la
Universidad de Jaén. Enfermería Global . 15, 41 (2016), 164–173.
[9]Sagaró del Campo, N.M. and Moraga Rodríguez, A. 2015. Creencias acerca del sexo,
el género y la masculinidad en adolescentes de distintos niveles de enseñanza.
MEDISAN . 19, 10 (2015), 1216–1223.
[10] Sánchez-Gómez, M.C. et al. 2019. Analysis of Quality of Live in the Deaf Com-
munity from a Blog. Distributed Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Special
Sessions, 15th International Conference (2019), 322–329.
[11] Sánchez-Gómez, M.C. et al. 2012. Manual de procedimiento en la investigación
cualitativa. Fundación Intras.
[12] Sarrado, J.J. et al. 2004. Evidencia científica en medicina: ¿única alternativa? Gac
Sanit . 18, 3 (2004), 13.
87TEEM’21, October 26–29, 2021, Barcelona, Spain Blanca Rocío Espinazo-López et al.
Table 1: Results of the semi-structured interviews. Source: Own production.
Question Answers
What do you understand
sexuality education to be? •For me, sexuality education teaches sexuality in all its aspects and without any concealment.
•The term sexuality education refers to the set of activities related to teaching, dissemination and
outreach about human sexuality at all ages of development, the female and male reproductive
system, sexual orientation, sexual relationships, family planning and contraceptive use, safe sex,
reproduction and, more specifically, human reproduction, sexual and reproductive rights, gender
studies and other aspects of human sexuality, to achieve a specific state of sexual and reproductive
health.
•Sexuality education disseminates a set of guides, activities and tools about sexuality dedicated
mainly to young people. It aims to teach about a wide range of topics related to sex and sexuality.
What is your opinion on this
one? •I think it is necessary to educate children about sexuality so that they do not have to resort to
websites or sites to solve their doubts in the future.
•I think it is something that nowadays and for quite a large percentage of families can be considered
a taboo subject in some aspects of the subject. It is essential to have very nurturing sex education
and the way it is taught.
Do you think that young
people are well educated
about sex?•No, very few young people talk openly about sexuality and end up resorting to porn sites that have
nothing to do with reality.
•No, I think that any young person today can learn more by researching on their own, since they
are not provided with the information required at certain ages for supposed doubts that may arise.
•No, the vast majority of young people receive no information about sexuality at all.
Do you think that good sex
education from an early age
is essential?•Very important, really very important. I believe that this type of education should be more
normalised in the home and we should start to normalise it from and for the very youngest
children. These are critical ages for a person’s education in general.
•Yes, because if sexuality is visualised from an early age, it helps them be more aware of the subject
and is not taboo in society.
Do you know what sexual
health includes? •Being in harmony with your body and mind and also with the society around you. Always respect
the sexuality of others and your own.
•Yes, physical, mental and social well-being to sexuality, i.e. a positive and respectful approach to
sex.
How does sexuality
education work to prevent
intimate partner violence
and aggression among
adolescents?•Teaching and educating about sexuality, good sexual health explains that one should have sex when
one wants to and feels safe, always respecting and taking into account the other person’s opinion.
•Implanting and teaching that we are all equal and we all deserve to be respected in our decisions.
Do you think you have had
adequate sex education from
your environment?•No, I have never been told openly about what sexuality or sex education was; on the contrary, I
have been the one who, from my own experiences and searches on appropriate websites, learned
what sexuality was and what I liked about it.
•No, I think it is always taboo between parents and children and that there is no proper dialogue
about it.
How do you think sexuality
education could be
improved?•Educating from a young age about sexuality, always encouraging respect for others.
•Perhaps I could not say how it could be improved, but what is true, and I emphasise since I have
already mentioned it above, is that we must further normalise and even strengthen such education,
regardless of age. Sex education is vital at all stages of our lives.
•By making social education a compulsory subject at school, society would be more aware of the
issue.
88