Investigating Culturally Responsive Design for Menstrual 
Tracking and Sharing Practices Among Individuals with 
Minimal Sexual Education 
Georgianna Lin Elizabeth Mynatt Neha Kumar 
University of Toronto Georgia Institute of Technology Georgia Institute of Technology 
Canada USA USA 
glin39@gatech.edu mynatt@gatech.edu neha.kumar@gatech.edu 
ABSTRACT 
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) research on menstrual tracking 
has emphasized the need for more inclusive design of mechanisms 
for tracking and sharing information on menstruation. We investi-
gate menstrual tracking and data-sharing attitudes and practices in 
educated, young (20-30 years old) menstruating individuals based in 
the United States, with self-identifed minimal menstrual education 
backgrounds. Using interviews (N=18), a survey (N=62), and partici-
patory design (N=7), we fnd that existing mechanisms for tracking 
and sharing data on menstruation are not adequately responsive to 
the needs of those who seek relevant menstrual education, are not 
in the sexual majority, and/or wish to customize what menstrual 
data they share and with whom. Our analysis highlights a design 
gap for participants with minimal sexual education backgrounds 
who wish to better understand their cycles. We also contribute a 
deepened understanding of structural health inequities that impact 
menstrual tracking and sharing practices, making recommenda-
tions for technology-mediated menstrual care. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI. 
KEYWORDS 
Menstrual tracking; menstrual health; health equity; culturally re-
sponsive design 
ACM Reference Format: 
Georgianna Lin, Elizabeth Mynatt, and Neha Kumar. 2022. Investigating 
Culturally Responsive Design for Menstrual Tracking and Sharing Practices 
Among Individuals with Minimal Sexual Education. In CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’22), April 29-May 5, 2022, New 
Orleans, LA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/3491102.3501824 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Recent Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) research has witnessed 
a burgeoning interest in investigations on gendered health and 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM 
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specifc permission and/or a 
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9157-3/22/04...$15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501824 wellbeing 1, with topics ranging from sexual to menstrual and 
maternal health, and more (e.g., [5, 6, 20, 45, 65]). As overall men-
strual health and hygiene management as well as datafcation of 
health receive growing attention from our research community 
(e.g., [19, 25, 72, 73, 75–77]), technology-mediated menstrual track-
ing options have garnered interest. Increasingly, many smartphone 
applications are being designed for predicting the length and fre-
quency of one’s menstrual cycle and fertility windows [25] based 
on information actively recorded by the user, such as period dates, 
sexual activity, medication usage, and more. Multiple studies have 
evaluated these applications and presented design gaps such as 
prediction inaccuracy, gendered design, goal exclusionary frame-
works, and lack in promoting menstrual literacy [25, 27, 61, 101]. 
Fox et al. have explored future menstrual tracking designs using 
participatory design methods and provided many high-level user 
concerns (e.g. assumptions about tracking goals, gender identity, 
and sexual partners) that further motivate our research [29]. 
Our research elaborates on previous fndings on inclusive men-
strual tracking design and investigates data sharing methods to 
provide further insight into current users’ aspirations for future 
design of menstrual tracking technologies. In addition, we draw on 
previous work on cultural responsiveness in HCI [22, 33, 50, 68] 
and work on health inequities’ roots in societal structures [ 70, 82] 
to discuss how the participants’ cultural backgrounds (e.g., access 
to menstrual health education and care, menstrual stigma at school 
and home, income, and education level) might impact the mech-
anisms they use for menstrual tracking. As a result, we examine 
our fndings through the culturally disparate backgrounds and rela-
tively conservative upbringings of the participants. 
Our mixed-method approach entailed frst investigating men-
strual tracking and sharing practices via a survey of 62 people. We 
then conducted 18 semi-structured interviews and a participatory 
design (PD) activity with 7 participants to explore future design di-
rections. All participants from the interviews and PD activity were 
college-educated menstruating individuals with minimal menstrual 
education backgrounds, minimal access to menstrual health care, 
and often grew up in homes with menstrual stigma. We found that 
current tracking systems fail to account for those who come from 
low menstrual health education backgrounds. In addition, individu-
als who face menstrual stigma at home wanted fexibility in how 
they shared their logged data—both in terms of who could see the 
1Infuenced by Keyes et al. critique on the use of the term "women’s health" in the 
HCI community [44], we use the term "gendered health" here to acknowledge that not 
all individuals impacted by menstrual, sexual, and reproductive health topics identify 
as women.CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
data and how much data was shared. We also saw that people, espe-
cially those who were unwilling to seek out medical professionals in 
case of an irregularity, desired ways of visualizing and interpreting 
their logged data as it pertained to their menstrual wellbeing. We 
found that for those who wish to improve their menstrual literacy, 
resources for culturally responsive menstrual education at home is 
a high priority. We conclude with recommendations for the design 
of technological solutions that might easily be integrated into men-
struating individuals’ daily routines, aford cross-platform use, and 
begin to address potential menstrual health inequity gaps. 
In this paper, we begin by detailing related work that has been 
conducted on menstruation in HCI, detail our mixed-methods ap-
proach towards addressing menstrual tracking design, and present 
our main fndings drawn from triangulating across our analyses. 
We then discuss implications of these fndings in terms of menstrual 
tracking needs and aspirations, and suggest recommendations for 
future designs. We conclude with a summary of the study with 
suggestions for future work in this space. Our contributions are 
three-fold: frst, we expand on prior work on gaps in menstrual 
tracking design through the cultural contexts of the participants, 
such as how menstrual health is addressed within a participant’s 
home and/or school; second, we uncover how tracking practices 
are shaped on account of minimal menstrual education; fnally, 
we provide insights for designing culturally responsive menstrual 
tracking solutions. 
2 RELATED WORK 
HCI is a multi-disciplinary feld that has increasingly involved 
social discussion and design implications. As more and more stake-
holders are engaged with, health and gender have also recently 
been examined through sociotechnical lens. Fields, such as Femi-
nist HCI [9], motivate the area of research as not only explorations 
to "represent human diversity", but also a "shift in social science 
knowledge production away from managing people to nurturing 
them." Still, as the feld matures additional shifts are still occurring 
such as movements away from research reinforcing "universalised, 
singular experience of womanhoods" [44]. 
Gendered health and wellbeing in recent years have seen work 
on a range of topics in this area, such as maternal and reproduc-
tive health, digital wellbeing, health hackathons, and more (e.g., 
[5, 6, 20, 45, 65]). This research has aimed at critiquing and devel-
oping technologies that help support pregnancy, motherhood, and 
childhood development [6, 20, 45, 83], also pointing out the lack of 
technology eforts targeting gendered wellbeing more generally [4]. 
More recently however, HCI has seen an expansion to a plethora of 
gendered health topics, including social impact, menstrual health 
and tracking, and menopause (e.g., [9, 25, 29, 47, 76, 91]). Related 
recent work has also examined design opportunities targeting gen-
dered sexual wellbeing [23, 41], intimate care [4, 5, 100], men-
tal health [21], and menopause [7, 49, 93], among other topics 
[31, 34, 44, 47]. 
Prior research has examined the relationship between menstrual 
health and hygiene from a range of perspectives, from an indica-
tion of needs to a fundamental human right [75, 77]. In addition 
to menstrual health, menstrual tracking intersects with the vast Lin et. al. 
feld of health informatics that analyzes insights and provides de-
sign guidance to help people track, understand, and share personal 
health data such as migraines [72], disease [59], habits [81], and 
others (e.g., [56, 57, 73, 84]). In work on analyzing inclusive men-
strual tracking practices, Epstein et al. studied the usage pattern of 
tracking application across the United States and identifed several 
design problems[ 25] in line with previous work that also focused 
on the usability problem of menstrual tracking applications [56, 60]. 
Fox et al., through participatory design, examined high-level user 
concerns about sharing, uncertainty, period prediction, and acciden-
tal periods [31]. Apart from software-based self-logging solutions 
such as smartphone applications, some recently developed wear-
able devices such as my.Flow [2] and LOONCUP [1] use embedded 
sensors to automatically detect menstrual fow volume, color and 
cycle lengths. Researchers have also studied how ambient light and 
color-emitting mirrors can be used for menstrual tracking [28, 34]. 
Additional research has investigated self-tracking within diferent 
gendered health contexts, such as fertility care [ 19], sensitive data 
management [30], and menopause/menopausal transition [7, 35, 89], 
contributing design implications such as creating personalized so-
lutions through collaboration and exploring automated sensing 
solutions and smart spaces. 
In gendered health, Keyes et al. illustrate that although research 
so far does well with articulating embodiment and gender, prior 
work often overlooks trans, disabled, and non-western perspec-
tives as well as intersections of race, class, sexuality, and cultural 
contexts [44]. At the intersection of menstrual health, HCI, and 
cultural contexts, much prior work has looked at communities in 
South Asia. For example, Tuli et al. have explored menstrual health 
education and stigma in India through culturally responsive design 
[90–92]. Jarrahi et al. [39] did a comparative study on the efect of 
menstrual health education approaches for adolescent individuals 
who menstruate and found the peer group method as most efective 
in promoting menstrual health behaviors in adolescents. Jain et al. 
[5] have created a solution for adolescent menstruators in Assam, 
India to seek support through a tablet-based game [37]. Outside of 
the South Asian context, Tran et al. designed a menstrual toy to help 
educate children on menstruation concepts at an early age. Labella 
[88] was created by Almeida et al. to promote self-understanding, 
exploration, and taboo-breaking. 
Similarly, in our paper, we examine how an individual’s back-
ground impacts their view on a potential health-solution. We turn to 
Salgado et al. who points out that all people involved in a design or 
evaluation process have their own cultural characteristics that can 
bias their understanding and interpretation of a product [68]. From 
a user experience perspective, the holistic design approach recog-
nizes that designs require a balance between usability, functionality, 
aesthetics, and stakeholders’ cultures [22, 50]. To determine what 
cultural information about a specifc community is relevant, the 
human values approach proposes that the family, social relations, 
economic system, and environment in which people live is closely 
connected to what people deem important and of value [33]. 
By looking at a participant’s cultural information, we also hope 
to contribute an understanding of societal origins of potential health 
and health disparities [96] in current menstrual tracking methods. 
In a systematic review of mobile health interventions, Stowell et al.Investigating Culturally Responsive Design for Menstrual Tracking and Sharing Practices 
found that many studies have examined the role of mobile appli-
cations, wearable trackers, and other mechanisms for promoting 
health generally, but little work has been done to determine how 
these solutions can be best designed for vulnerable populations 
[82]. Veinot et al. fnd that many health informatics interventions 
are biased towards socioeconomically advantaged groups, thus in-
creasing the risk of producing intervention-generated inequalities 
[97]. 
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute reports that in-
equities in health have their roots in societal structures such as 
an individual’s social class, racial ethnic background, and other 
dimensions of social stratifcation (e.g., sex and geography) [70]. 
For example, Bui et al. suggest gender inequities perceived by fe-
male undergraduate students in southern Vietnamese culture in-
fuence their sexual and reproductive health, especially in regards 
to health information seeking, gynecological care access, contra-
ceptive use responsibility, and child bearing [14]. Kaufman fnds 
that poor reproductive health care service seeking was directly 
related to underinvestment, health inequities, and lack of reproduc-
tive health education in Chinese villages [42]. Many more studies 
around the world fnd that inequitable concentrations of economic, 
social, personal, and political power reinforces both reproductive 
health-seeking and reproductive health care providing biases that 
can be detrimental to the patient [15, 26, 46, 69, 74, 95]. Our study 
takes place in the United States, where menstrual stigma is generally 
less limiting than prior studied contexts in the Global South, for ex-
ample (e.g., [90, 91]). However, the participants from our study came 
from culturally disparate backgrounds with minimal menstrual ed-
ucation, signaling a U.S. demographic with health needs that may 
warrant greater attention in future work. Previous work done in the 
U.S. have primarily highlighted racial ethnic background, economic 
status, and sexual minority status as major societal structures for 
sexual health inequity [12, 17, 18, 24, 64, 98]. 
With these purposes in mind, we expand on studies and evalua-
tions done on current menstrual tracking solutions [25, 27, 61, 101] 
as well as critiques on the reinforcement of "normalized" user char-
acteristics such as gender [79], body type [13, 78], or age in tech-
nologies [7, 36, 52, 53, 58, 71] by detailing the areas in which current 
menstrual designs are lacking and design suggestions for future 
solutions that are culturally responsive of various menstruating 
groups. We examine our fndings in the contexts of the participants’ 
families, school, peers, environment and to a lesser degree, edu-
cation and income, and how these cultural contexts impact their 
opinions on menstrual health matters. In doing so, we address men-
strual health inequities that may stem from such backgrounds. We 
then discuss the implications these backgrounds have on menstrual 
tracking designs. We adopt Bardzell’s Feminist HCI [8] standpoint 
with regards to our methodological positions of empathetic rela-
tionships, co-construction, and refexivity [9]. In our studies, we 
aim to make the "individual an active participant, and them taking 
action is at the fore of our quest to design systems that promote 
agency, autonomy, and knowledge" [87]. In doing so, we take our 
cue from the works published in the ACM TOCHI special issue 
on the body pushing us to re-imagine approaches to engaging in 
culturally responsive design [3, 29, 44, 47]. CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
3 METHODS 
We employed a mixed-methods approach—approved by the institu-
tional review board (IRB) at our institution—using a survey, inter-
views, and participatory design (PD) to gain a deeper understanding 
of current menstrual tracking design limitations and explore the 
aspirations the participants in our study had for future menstrual 
tracking designs. We frst conducted a survey of 62 individuals 
to gather how adults across ages viewed current menstrual track-
ing cultural responsiveness and what themes we could explore 
further in our interviews. We then conducted 18 interviews with 
participants who have had minimal menstrual education growing 
up. Finally, drawing from these interviews and taking notes from 
feminist HCI methodologies [9], such as co-construction of core 
research questions and understanding participants’ experiences 
through empathic relationships, we conducted a PD (n=7) session 
to better understand current menstrual tracking practices and con-
siderations for those practices, and to also discover desires that 
participants with low menstrual literacy had to improve menstrual 
tracking methods. Participants who took the survey were distinct 
from the ones who we interviewed and conducted the PD session 
with. However, there was an overlap of 3 participants who, after 
being interviewed, expressed interest in participating in future 
workshops. They were invited back to participate in the PD session. 
For each method used, we provide details on the participants, the 
types of data collected, and how we analyzed this data to arrive 
at our analysis. We quote survey responses with SXX, interviews 
with IXX, and participatory design quotes with DX. 
3.1 Method 1: Survey 
We designed an in-depth survey targeting adults who menstru-
ate, to understand how these adults perceived cultural responsive-
ness and informativeness of current menstrual tracking methods. 
We included 39 questions, with 6 questions targeting those who 
had or have menstrual experiences, 14 targeting those who have 
tracked their menstrual cycles, 8 targeting those who have never 
tracked their menstrual cycles, 7 focused on opinions on sharing 
menstrual data, and 4 focused on demographics. We included both 
open- and closed-format questions with diferent answering for-
mats. For example, some questions were multiple choice, asking 
about the participant’s current menstrual experience (e.g., irregu-
lar cycles, use of birth control, perimenopause). Some were Likert 
scale questions such as the degree to which a participant’s current 
tracking method served certain purposes. Some were more open-
ended such as questions on what characteristics seemed to make 
a participant’s menstrual cycle irregular. Others were questions 
with multiple answer choices such as symptoms tracked by the 
participant. 
We recruited survey participants through university and authors’ 
social network email chains, WhatsApp, Facebook, Reddit forums 
such as r/SampleSize, and Slack workspaces. Online crowdsourcing 
platforms such as r/SampleSize have been reported as a potential 
recruitment tools for diverse participant pools [54]. Studies have 
shown that participants recruited from such platforms usually re-
port diverse ages, education levels, income, and employment, were 
inexpensive, and are often internally motivated to participate in 
user research [38, 54]. For these reasons, we decided to disseminateCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Lin et. al. 
Table 1: Demographics Breakdown: survey, interview, and PD 
Survey (62 people) 
Age  min  18,  max  50,  mean  25.3,  median  22.5  
Self-Identifed  Gender  female  54,  male  7,  1  unansw ered  
Race  Asian/Pacifc  Islander  43,  Caucasian  16,  Hispanic/  Latino  2,  
Black/African  American  2,  Other  3  
Menstrual  Experience  Regular  41,  Irregular  12,  Perimenopause  1,  Menopause   2  
Education  High  school  graduate,  equivalent,  or  less  12,  Bachelor’s  35,  Master’s  15  
Interview (18 people) 
Age  min  19,
  max  26,  mean  22.8,  median   22  
Race  Caucasian  6,  East  Asian  4,  South-east  Asian  3,  
South  Asian  3,  Asian  Hispanic/Latino  1  
Education  Self-Identifed  Gender  female  18  
Pursuing/  Completed  Bachelor’s  10,  Master’s  8  
PD (7 people) 
Age  min  19,  max  25,  mean  22.4,  median  23  
Self-Identifed  Gender  female  7  
Race  Caucasian  3,  South  Asian  3,  East  Asian  1  
Education  Pursuing/  Completed  Bachelor’s  5,  Master’s  2  
our survey to not only student networks, but also online platforms 
as well. The survey was created and distributed in English. At the 
beginning of the survey, we provided a description of the study. 
We collected 62 complete responses from participants who were 
ages 18 to 50 with 84% of the respondents falling in the 20-30 age 
group. 89.7% of the respondents had experienced a menstrual cycle 
at some point in their life and of those 19.2% have/had an irregular 
menstrual cycle and 5.4% were transitioning into, in, or have gone 
through menopause. 82.1%, of the respondents track their period 
(see Table 1). Of the 7 participants who identifed themselves as 
male, one experienced menstruation and tracked their cycle, while 
the other six made up the non-menstruating individuals in our 
survey. These six identifed themselves as partners or friends to 
menstruators. 
We calculated percentages for all questions except the open-
ended ones. For open-ended questions, we conducted thematic 
analysis [11] through frst coding responses from diferent stake-
holders. These codes were then clustered into common themes 
and patterns through the process of afnity diagramming [43]. 
Themes that came up repeatedly were "track using phone applica-
tion", "wanting to know more about my body", "sharing data with 
others", "motivation to track", or "need for more education". 
3.2 Method 2: Interviews 
On analyzing the survey responses, we identifed several areas we 
wanted to explore further, including motivations behind tracking 
or non-tracking, how menstrual tracking data is shared with others, 
and the pain points of current tracking methods. From the survey 
demographics, we also observed a prevalence of higher-ed individ-
uals with menstrual cycles between the ages of 20 and 30 who grew 
up in environments with minimal access to menstrual education. 
Minimal access entailed having only taken one sexual and/or men-
strual health class or less. For those that had taken sexual and/or 
menstrual health classes before, they expressed that the classes did 
not prepare them for their frst period and/or their future menstrual cycles. With this group in mind, we designed and conducted 18 
semi-structured interviews with individuals with a menstrual cycle 
who were raised in areas where sexual-conservatism is prevalent 
such as "Deep South" America, China and India, and were pursuing 
or have a higher-ed degree. We screened participants through the 
same self-reported minimal sexual education characteristics as the 
survey. For example, we asked potential participants the amount of 
menstrual education they had received, how prepared they felt for 
their frst period and/or future menstrual cycles, and their percep-
tion of their own menstrual health knowledge level. We interviewed 
those who had minimal to no menstrual health education prior to 
menarche, felt unprepared for menarche and/or future cycles, and 
perceived themselves as having minimal menstrual education. Each 
interview was conducted by one researcher via phone or desktop 
online meeting platform such as Zoom or BlueJeans. During each 
interview, the researcher would lead the interview and ask follow-
up questions when necessary. Interviews lasted about 30 minutes 
and the audios were recorded. Participants were recruited through 
the authors’ social networks using a combination of purposive and 
snowball sampling [32]. 
Of the 18 interviewees, all but 4 are currently tracking their 
periods on a mobile device either through applications (e.g. Clue, 
Apple Health, Period Tracker, Flo, FitBit, P Tracker Lite), phone 
calendar, and/or text history. Of the four who do not currently track, 
two always had their period on the same date, with a margin of 
error of a day, one became consistent in date after a few years who 
has also never tracked, and one has no period consistency because 
of her type of birth control but used to track before. In addition, 
9 participants identifed as having irregular periods and all have 
gone through a span of time in which their period became irregular 
for more than 3 months. 
We analyzed interview data by open coding interviews line by 
line. We then used afnity diagramming [43] to cluster similar pat-
terns with these codes. Through our thematic analysis [11], we 
discovered common themes such as "minimal sexual education",Investigating Culturally Responsive Design for Menstrual Tracking and Sharing Practices 
"frst menstrual health struggles", "dealing with uncertainty", "sup-
port seeking sharing", and "personalization." 
3.3 Method 3: Participatory Design 
Drawing from the interviews and following Feminist HCI frame-
work in involving people with menstrual cycles as active actors 
in design processes [9], we conducted a participatory design (PD) 
workshop with 7 current menstrual trackers. The participants were 
recruited through the authors’ social networks using a combination 
of purposive and snowball sampling [32], who were also from mini-
mal menstrual education backgrounds pursuing a higher-education 
degree. Our goal was to better understand participants’ perceptions 
and attitudes towards menstrual cycle tracking and derive feature 
sets that were considered of high importance. 
The activity was conducted on the Georgia Institute of Tech-
nology campus with all researchers present. One researcher led 
the workshop, while the others took observational notes of the 
participants. At the beginning of the workshop, we explained the 
study protocol and obtained written consent from all participants. 
All data was recorded using feld notes and photographs. 
For the PD activity, we encouraged the participants to develop 
their ideal version of what a “magical” menstrual tracker would 
do for them. Following loosely Spinuzzi’s 3-stage process for par-
ticipatory design research [80] as well as Bardzell’s principle for 
building empathic relationship with participants [9], we frst had 
participants introduce and familiarize themselves with each other, 
researchers, and the meeting space. Then, we entered a discovery 
stage in which researchers and participants worked to understand 
menstrual values, goals, and challenges. Finally, the participants 
worked together to prototype technologies for future menstrual 
experiences. 
The participants created two tools that they would want that 
tracked their periods perfectly regardless of whether the technology 
was feasible or not. The creation process included writing out pain 
points they would like to address, drawing out scenarios they would 
use the technology in, and sketching out what the technology 
might look like. During the PD, the participants came up with two 
main solutions for their “magical and/or perfect” tracker: a color-
changing calendar that was incorporated into their (bathroom) 
mirrors and a wearable smart watch with physiological sensors that 
collected data that could be visualized as trends and relationships 
seen in Figure 2 and Figure 3. 
We used participant’s sketches and designs, open coded tran-
scribed discussions, and open coded feld notes to refect on the 
design process and describe the fnal design ideas. 
3.4 Limitations 
As HCI researchers seeking information on menstrual tracking 
opinions and current usage, our methods were biased toward not 
only menstrual trackers but also menstrual trackers using tech-
nology. Only 17.9% of the survey participants and 16.7% of the 
interviewees had never tracked their menstrual cycle before. Out 
of the surveyed trackers, only 23% of them do not use technology 
to track their periods while all interview trackers used technology 
to track. Thus, the data may not be representative for populations 
who do not track or do not use technology to track. However, from CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
the survey open responses and interviews, we do glean some in-
sight into circumstances that might lead a user to stop tracking, 
such as changes in life stages or loss of motivation. In addition, 
another limitation of the study is the lack of racial, age, and gender 
diversity. Although we sampled for any US adult in the survey and 
any menstruating US adult in the interviews and PD activity, the 
participants from all three methods skewed towards young (20-30 
yrs), identifed as female, college-educated, industrialized, and Cau-
casian and Asian/Pacifc Islander. Future work should be done to 
expand our fndings to diferent education backgrounds, economic 
statuses, racial ethnic backgrounds, age-groups, sexual minorities, 
accesses to technology, and other groups underrepresented in our 
study. 
4 FINDINGS 
In the following section, we detail six main fndings extracted from 
our mixed-methods approach. These include: a lack of culturally 
responsive functionality for multiple marginalized groups beyond 
gender and embodiment; a demand for visualizing and putting 
data in context as it pertains to menstrual health; a distinction be-
tween pro-social and non-social sharing practices; the impact of 
limited menstrual health education, existing both in participants’ 
backgrounds and in tracking methods; addressing feelings of un-
certainty in menstrual tracking; and aspirations for future methods 
such as appeals for increased mobility and access within techno-
logical solutions. 
4.1 Lack of Culturally Responsive Design for 
Marginalized Groups 
Expanding Epstein et al. fndings [25], around half of the menstrual 
trackers we surveyed felt that their app was less than adequate in 
providing culturally responsive functionality in all of the following 
categories: diferent age groups, impairments, race/nationalities, 
sexual orientation, and illnesses relating to gendered health. Around 
40% of the survey takers thought that their current tracking method 
was less than adequate in diferent life stage inclusively (i.e. preg-
nancy, perimenopause, menopause, birth control). Amongst the 
few people who were entering, experiencing, or have experienced 
menopause, all of them noted that they stopped using their previ-
ous, usually long-term (around 10+ years), tracking method because 
the functionalities were no longer useful. One participant stopped 
tracking during her pregnancy and was surprised to see her ap-
plication had factored the 9-month period-break into its period 
prediction algorithm when she started her normal menstrual cycle 
again (S55). 
Those who self-diagnosed themselves with natural or chemically 
induced irregular periods, such as with birth control, also voiced 
similar woes. Irregular periods are characterized by any abnormali-
ties in the rhythm of a menstrual cycle and hormonal fuctuations 
[86] that usually encapsulates extreme deviance from "normal" tim-
ing and fow. As the participants were not medically-diagnosed with 
irregular cycles, the participants also acknowledged that their lack 
of menstrual knowledge could impact how they view their cycle as 
abnormal. P12 expressed her transition from tracking religiously to 
not tracking at all because her application assumed regular period 
behavior. She felt no motivation to track when the application couldCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Lin et. al. 
Figure 2: Participant example notes from participatory de-
sign. Figure 1: Afnity Diagram of Interviews 
not predict her irregular period. Opening her application became a 
source of anxiety because she knew that her period would not line 
up with application predictions: 
“I used to track all the time because I am very forget-
ful. I tracked before I started birth control because not 
only did I know when my period might come, I also 
knew what symptoms I previously had. I stopped do-
ing that when I started birth control because it made 
me become super irregular. I then stopped tracking 
all together because every time I opened the app, I 
felt like I had to focus on how irregular I was and I 
couldn’t tell the app I was irregular and just wanted 
to track symptoms.” (P12) 
While reinforcing “the idea of a universalised, singular experi-
ence of womanhood” [ 44], current menstrual tracking methods fail 
to address the needs of those in marginalized groups [82]. 
4.2 Data in Menstrual Health Context 
In logging their symptoms, the participants held an expectation 
that they would be able to discern abnormalities when going back 
through their historical logs. This expectation often did not hold 
true. Approximately 70% of the survey takers tracked menstrual 
characteristics besides just dates and timing. Most of the period 
tracking interviewees tracked at least blood fow and major symp-
toms. We observed a demand to log symptoms in both groups; 
however, none of the interviewees expressed that they had ex-
tracted any defnitive information about their menstrual symptoms 
from the application due to issues including tracking method, data 
clarity, non-existent representation of trends, or non-existent sum-
mary of historical data. P16 expressed how she has always enteredInvestigating Culturally Responsive Design for Menstrual Tracking and Sharing Practices 
Figure 3: Drawings of participant scenarios. 
every symptom she experiences right before, during, and after her 
period. However, when she reviews past data, she cannot discern 
what is abnormal or normal. She elaborates that she feels especially 
frustrated with her period fow. To this day, she does not know if 
she has a regular fow or not and she did not remember ever learn-
ing how to discern from her community or school either. Clicking 
through logs from previous months just confuses her more because 
she does not know if there are consistencies when she’s comparing 
one day’s data at a time. 
"My application doesn’t give me any feedback on 
whether or not my logged data is abnormal or not 
such as fow, volume, and color. It won’t even tell you 
what it’s predicting or how it is predicting. I wish I 
could get a paragraph synopsis based on what I have CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
entered into the app. I sometimes wonder why I even 
bother to log my symptoms." (P8) 
In addition, we noticed that there seems to exist a discrepancy 
between how menstrual applications are designed and advertised 
and how they end up being used by the participants. The research 
participants track for a myriad of reasons (i.e. pregnancy, hormones, 
medical reasons), but by far the most popular (89%) reason is to 
know when their period occurs. In comparison, only 17% of trackers 
went into menstrual tracking for reasons besides dates and tim-
ing. However, a large percentage of users started tracking other 
menstrual characteristics once they started tracking, such as period 
fow (56%), appearance changes like bloating and acne (33%), and 
fertility windows (25%). Once they start tracking, the percentage of 
users who track menstrual characteristics beyond dates and timing 
increases to 70%. Both trackers in our interviews and PD brought 
up stories about how they had heard about tracking as only a way 
to keep track of dates be it from their friends, family, or online. 
"I regret not tracking earlier because now I do it reli-
giously for my health and it gives me comfort. But in 
the past, I thought menstrual tracking was only for 
dates and people said the prediction was really bad so 
I just never cared to check it out. Even when I opened 
the application for the frst time, it took me a second 
to fnd that I could track more than just my period 
date." (P15) 
For the interview participants that have tracked before, they 
expressed very diferent concerns about current tracking solutions 
compared to the two participants who have never tracked. We found 
that the trackers were more concerned about how their logged data 
related to each other, checking their logging history, next period 
predictions, and user experience. On the other hand, participants 
who have never tracked saw tracking only as a means to predict 
their next period. They did not feel a need to do so when they 
felt like they could predict their next period. While the trackers 
tended to note down more than one symptom, such as pain, craving, 
fow, and mood, the non-trackers had a inclination towards keeping 
mental notes of one physical symptom that seemed to dominate 
over other symptoms they might have noticed. In all three cases, 
this symptom was menstrual cramps. 
"I don’t track because my timing was never unex-
pected. So I never felt the need to track... My life is 
very routine so nothing really changes. I do take care-
ful notice what causes my cramps." (P11) 
4.3 Distinction Between Pro-social vs 
Non-social sharing 
Around 54% of the survey participants said they would like to or 
have tracked a friend’s menstrual data; with 50% indicating their 
signifcant other or sexual partner, and 15% their child. Of the non-
self-trackers, 30.8% said that they use a phone application to track 
others. In the same group, 39% said they track others to understand 
the person they are tracking’s emotional changes better, 31% said to 
educate the person they are tracking, and 30.8% said to understand 
the person they are tracking health better. These results are not 
exclusive to one another.CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
Many of the interview participants also share their menstrual 
cycle information, with close ones, or for health, whether to bond 
with other menstruating individuals, or to inform their doctor. P6 is 
a tracker who uses her chat history with her mother as a a means to 
check when she had her last period. However, all of the participants 
had mixed feelings about who they would share their menstrual 
tracking information. While sharing would enable the other side 
to empathize with and provide care, sharing might also be a form 
of "unwarranted control over their bodies" or embarrassing and 
uncomfortable. 
"I got mad to my dad and big brother. They say oh 
she’s on her period. They just assume she’s on her 
period. I prefer they don’t ask. I don’t want them to 
know when I am on my period even if I don’t say 
anything. I am shy and I don’t feel comfortable. It’s 
weird. My boyfriend will know because he can get 
emotionally prepared, get sweets, and take care of 
me." (P13) 
Even for the PD participants who designed sharing capabilities 
into their “magical” tracker put restrictions on sharing. For their 
mirror solution, the participants expressed needs for privacy and 
password protection. Their wearable solution could not stand on its 
own and relied on outside technology such as a phone application 
for data interpretation. However, none of the participants were 
adverse to having multiple technology sources working as a whole 
solution for menstrual tracking, rather they encouraged data fuidity 
between devices for ease of access: "I feel like I would only want 
to send part of my calendar; I don’t want other people to know 
everything." (D3). 
From all three methods, we found that the participants have 
both pro-social and non-social menstrual data sharing opinions. 
None of the participants were open to the idea of sharing their 
period information with everyone, but none wanted to only keep 
period information to themselves always. Common sharing cus-
toms included: telling their friends if they were on their period, 
complaining to any empathetic ear if a symptom was particularly 
intense, telling their signifcant other so their signifcant other could 
take care of them, and not telling their guardians or relatives be it 
about symptoms or dates because this disclosure would sometimes 
be uncomfortable. 
When discussing potential designs, P13 expressed how nice it 
would be if her boyfriend could track with her sometimes. She was 
tired of reminding him every cycle especially when she was already 
in a bad mood. On the other hand, D4 made a point to include a 
password on the smart menstrual tracking mirror so that her father 
would not be able to view her menstrual data. 
"One worry is privacy; Roommates can come into my 
room and look at my info, I don’t want that...If I am 
going on a vacation with the girls, I would want to 
sync up our calendars...For my family, I feel like I 
would only want to send part of my calendar; I don’t 
want them to know everything." (D1) Lin et. al. 
4.4 The Impact of Limited Menstrual Health 
Education 
While 83% of the participants felt that their tracking method pro-
vided them adequate or more accurate prediction, with similar high 
ratings for tracking all that they wanted to track, the organization 
and clarity of the method, and comfort of the method, 48% felt 
that their current tracking method did not give any informative ad-
vice about their menstrual health and 50% felt the same way about 
general menstrual health education. These sentiments were also ar-
ticulated by the interview and PD participants who expressed woes 
over not being provided adequate menstrual preparation growing 
up and even now as they track their periods. 
All interview and PD participants came from a self-identifed 
"minimal sexual health education background." Many of the partici-
pants cited not only a lack of educational but also parental/guardian 
support, especially for their frst period as well as conveying trau-
matic experiences from their frst periods. P16 shared a story about 
how the frst time she used a tampon, her mother had not told her 
how to use it, so she had inserted the applicator and the tampon 
together and was in pain for hours: "When I got my frst period, I 
thought I was dying." (P15). 
We found that often when the participant comes from a minimal 
menstrual education background, their guardians often did as well. 
11 of the interviewees expressed that their mothers came from con-
servative, low menstrual health backgrounds which contributed to 
minimal menstrual conversations. A common distinction between 
the participants and their guardians, however, was the openness 
of period talk. The participants were more likely than their par-
ents at the same age to mention their cycles to guardians at some 
point of their lives as well as discuss it amongst their friends. How-
ever, multiple participants discussed how their guardians grew up 
in environments where periods were not talked about in schools 
or amongst guardians and was heavily shameful and stigmatized. 
Almost all of the Asian participants’ mothers were a part of this 
category. 
"Sometimes she would talk about it, it would be a little 
awkward. She had to whisper about it. I felt awkward 
from her whispering about it. I don’t see why we had 
to whisper about it, why can’t she be direct. My mom 
grew up in a small town and for her it was a bit taboo 
and not frequently talked about. If it was, it was in 
hushed tones. Deep South (United States), middle of 
nowhere, was where she grew up. I think my opinion 
didn’t mirror hers later on because I grew up around 
girls who talked about it in a non-taboo way." (P16) 
There also seemed to be a diference between the frst period 
experiences for those that had involved guardians and those who 
had guardians who did not have conversations with their child 
about menstrual health beforehand. The participants who did not 
have conversations with their guardians beforehand expressed feel-
ings of great uncertainty, thoughts of them being abnormal, and 
were less likely to reach out to their guardians on their frst period. 
Multiple of these interviewees thought of their frst time periods as 
traumatic and thought that something was drastically wrong with 
them. Participants who had guardian support, on the other hand,Investigating Culturally Responsive Design for Menstrual Tracking and Sharing Practices 
panicked less and sought information from their guardians. These 
participants often started tracking earlier (1-2 yrs) as well. 
"My mom used to track for me when I frst got it. I 
think maybe for the frst two or three? This helped 
me start tracking." (P3) 
However, the participants were not ignorant to their own mini-
mal menstrual education backgrounds. On the contrary, they wanted 
easier access to resources for themselves and peers. While viewing 
current access to menstrual health professionals from where they 
grew up as mostly expensive and far away, all of the PD partic-
ipants mentioned a need to include readily-available menstrual 
health education sources in both of their design solutions. For the 
mirror, they proposed integrating information sharing with medical 
professionals as well as health tips that would pop up when entered 
symptoms that were abnormal from previous data. For the wear-
able, they proposed a companion application that had forums with 
discussions and Q&A’s between other menstruating users on the 
topic of menstrual health. The participants expressed how talking 
to other individuals in the past who have gone through similar men-
strual experiences was both informative and also mentally assuring 
that they were not alone. 
"There used to be this website where you can go...if 
you’re having a breakdown and talk to someone to 
calm you down. I wish I had that for periods." (D2) 
4.5 Addressing Feelings of Uncertainty in 
Menstrual Tracking 
In dealing with their menstrual cycle, the interview participants 
go to great lengths to feel a sense of control over their periods 
while simultaneously feeling that many aspects of their period 
are out of their control. Many (n=10) of the interview participants 
feel the least amount of control around period timing as well as 
symptoms. Common feelings expressed by them about their cycles 
were "powerless", "uncontrollable", and "unpredictable." P1, P11, 
P12, and P15 shared specifc sentiments that when their periods are 
irregular they felt discomfort both physically and mentally. 
"I always had to be prepared. It was such an inconve-
nience when you don’t know when it’ll come. If I get 
surprised, I felt like I had to prepare for the worst." 
(P15) 
As a result, following "old-wives" tales, seeking out information, 
and tracking often became both assurance and an attempt to feel 
control. Following hearsay advice was a common approach the 
Asian participants took to try and alleviate their symptoms, even if 
results were inconsistent across cycles, such as "not drinking cold 
water on your period" and "drinking ginger tea to start their period." 
However, this lack of consistency did not bother the participants 
and instead gave them comfort that they made an attempt. "At least 
I tried this time and if it does not work, I can try something else 
next time" was a common view held by these participants. This 
penchant for "next time" provided enough security for them to 
not to feel powerless in both cases of following hearsay as well as 
searching for their symptoms online. The non-Asian participants 
expressed hearing fewer "old-wives" tales growing up than the 
Asian counterparts. In further questioning, the Asian participants CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
cited their mothers as the main source of these advice and also noted 
that their mothers also came from minimal menstrual education 
backgrounds. 
Finding information usually entailed typing symptom causes 
into a search engine and rarely fnding a medical professional (n=1). 
All of the interview participants had used a search engine to look 
up their symptoms. In all cases, they have searched the exact same 
questions again during a later cycle because the frst search did not 
provide satisfactory answers. However, this failure did not report-
edly create more anxiety but instead facilitated a self-assurance 
process. P17 when prompted about why she felt assurance even 
after not fnding any answers to her symptoms realized that every 
answer she’s ever sought out was so vague that she left feeling like 
she had to tell herself that everything is probably alright so she does 
not get anxious. She also expressed a tiny hope that the next time 
she searches the same thing again, she will get fruitful answers. In 
the same prompt, she also reached an epiphany that she does not 
actually know if she has a regular period or not because she did 
not know what "regular" actually meant. She had just assumed she 
was regular because she never felt intense cramps. 
Similarly, tracking has rarely given the participants additional 
information that they did not already know, yet they are comforted 
by entering data alone. Although these participants were more 
likely to be more in tune with their bodies such as being able to 
recall their last period faster as well as more symptoms than non-
trackers, they rarely observed trends or idiosyncratic characteristics 
within their bodies via their tracking method. This observation 
follows the additional fnding that the participants have a hard 
time understanding the relationship between their tracked data 
and their menstrual health status. P12 conveyed how she used to 
track everything including her period, but only when she presented 
her tracked data to a medical professional did she know that she 
had a menstrual health problem. No matter how she looked at the 
data, she was unable to discern any concerns from the symptoms 
or dates that she entered. However, she never felt anything was 
wrong and happily entered her period symptoms each month as 
she felt like it would give her clarity one day. Like her, tracking 
for many became their largest source for feelings of control over 
their period. As P2 put it, "Tracking feels like more control over 
something uncontrollable." 
"I track a lot about my heath: workout, illness, some-
times food and water intake. Mentally, it makes me 
feel in control. It actually gives me clarity. I like being 
self-aware. " (P12) 
However, how the feeling of self-control translates to self-awareness 
has yet to be established. 
4.6 Aspirations for Future Technological Solutions 
Around 77% of the survey trackers (n=40), 78% of the interviewees 
(n=14), and all PD participants use their mobile phones to track 
their periods. Many cited the phone’s mobile and reminder abilities 
for using their phone to track. "I tried using a little calendar that 
my school gave to me when I was younger but it was too much to 
keep up with/log so I just downloaded an app" (S27). However, par-
ticipants from all three methods talked about how pulling out theirCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
phones to log their timing or symptoms was a hassle and sometimes 
if they were busy, they would easily forget to log altogether. 
With these pain-points in mind, the PD participants created 
their two main solutions: the smart mirror and the wearable. Both 
solutions emphasized tracked data displayed in a visual way for 
fast access as well as on "easy incorporation" into routine life. In 
addition, both solutions required a quick way to peruse menstrual 
history and extract trends from the color-coded calendar based on 
symptoms and dates to the data visualization compilations done of 
medical data. Neither solution was concerned with collecting too 
much data. The participants viewed the smart mirror as more easily 
accessible by unwanted parties in comparison to privacy aforded 
by the wearable. 
During the PD, we found that the participants had a strong 
inclination toward automating the menstrual tracking process in 
a way that could fow naturally into an individual’s daily routine. 
More specifcally, participants desired a design that is portable, easy 
to integrate into their preexisting schedules, readily adoptable, does 
not involve intrusive sensors, and operable on multiple platforms 
(e.g., a wearable and an accompanying app). Although we did not 
ask the interviewees or respondents about designs they would like 
to see, the ease of logging sentiments in ubiquitous solutions were 
not unmentioned. P11, who has never found appeal in tracking 
before, shared how if her home assistant (e.g., Alexa) asked her for 
logging information and sent that data to her phone, she would 
start logging. In addition, she has considered wearables–especially 
smart watches–for potential ease of logging but has not gotten a 
smartwatch for fnancial reasons. 
Easy integration amongst the participants encapsulated two 
designs: one that was ubiquitous to their lifestyle and one that 
could be paired with existing technology while still standing alone. 
Common themes around logging menstrual symptoms that came up 
were about forgetfulness, inconvenience, and anxiety. To mediate 
these feelings, the participants’ solution was to create a tracker that 
they had to use not only on a period-basis but also a daily-basis 
such as a mirror. 
"On my phone, I always forget to put in information 
for certain days and I don’t realize I forget till the end 
of the week. I wish there was a way to make me put 
in tracking stuf easier or forced me to do it kind of 
like taking blood, like in the morning when you have 
to prick yourself." (D3) 
The other integration across devices had to do with the partici-
pants wanting to view data in diferent ways and serving diferent 
functions. For example, how they log their data and how they in-
terpret their data did not need to be on the same device. D1 shared 
how her current smartwatch has health logging and she would 
like that data to feed into applications such as her period tracking 
application so that she could analyze all of her health data as it 
pertains to her menstrual health. 
5 DISCUSSION 
As more devices and platforms are introduced for self-measuring 
and monitoring one’s bodily activities and functions, self-tracking 
and self-care practices are becoming more and more prevalent [56]. Lin et. al. 
In an efort to improve their lives, users log data to better under-
stand themselves [55, 67], and menstrual tracking is no exception 
[25]. Although self-surveillance practices have been shown to help 
people feel more control and help them achieve personal goals, 
current designs for menstrual tracking have not only failed to rec-
tify its limited defnitions of sexual, menstrual, and reproductive 
health, but have also continued to "perpetuate normative stereo-
types and assumptions about people as sexual and reproductive 
subjects" [25, 56]. While evaluating these self-tracking methods 
and addressing the impact the participants’ cultural characteris-
tics might have on their understanding of their method [68], we 
found no exception to the above statement in our work. We ex-
pand on how the environments and values [22, 33, 50, 68] of the 
users informed their tracking needs and how they gave meaning 
to their tracking methods. We also call out gaps that current users 
have with existing trackers, and we provide suggestions for more 
culturally responsive designs, especially from a lens of those with 
minimal menstrual health background. In addition, while we fnd 
implications specifc to those who are from conservative, minimal 
menstrual education backgrounds, we fnd minimal divergences 
across the represented cultural groups in our study. In our discus-
sion, we aim to follow Bardzell’s refexivity feminist HCI principle 
[9]. We put forth implications to not only potentially improve the 
menstrual tracking experience, but also elaborate on the structures 
that reinforce inconsistent functionality for marginalized commu-
nities. 
5.1 Cultural Context Inclusivity 
Multiple evaluations have found that current menstrual tracking 
methods fail to culturally responsively design for individuals who 
do not have regular menstrual cycles, individuals who are seeking 
accurate menstrual education, as well as individuals who share their 
menstrual data with anyone but their potential male signifcant 
other [25, 27, 29, 61, 101]. 
Like in previous studies [25, 64], we found that the participants 
were concerned over the dearth of functionalities provided for 
those that are not in the sexual majority: regular periods with 
singular tracking purposes. This absence of support is especially 
prevalent for groups who have self-reported irregular periods, are 
taking birth control, are entering into a diferent life stage such as 
pregnancy, or transitioning into being or not being a menstruator 
(e.g. travel, stress). In our study we found that the above groups 
are not only aware of the design disparities against themselves 
but across other minorities as well. The participants expressed the 
existence of multiple design failures across diferent age groups, 
impairments, race/nationalities, sexual orientation and illnesses 
relating to menstrual health. Some of these feelings are supported by 
studies that have found that very few menstrual tracking methods 
address needs of patients struggling with infertility [101] and sexual 
orientation [25] if at all. 
Furthermore, we found that many current menstrual tracking 
methods do not account for an individual’s menstrual educational 
background or provide means to pursue one. In Eschler et. al. eval-
uation of menstrual tracking applications, they found that their 
sample of applications had insufcient support for aiding or pro-
moting menstrual literacy, especially for teen and perimenopausalInvestigating Culturally Responsive Design for Menstrual Tracking and Sharing Practices 
users [27]. This gap is especially prevalent amongst the participants 
who neither gathered menstrual knowledge from their schools, 
guardians, or tracking method and were often experiencing self-
reported menstrual irregularities not voiced by their peers. In addi-
tion, many of these same participants also grew up under guardians 
who also came from backgrounds of minimal menstrual health 
literacy and heavy menstrual stigma. The participants’ teen experi-
ences with periods, similar to those in previous menstrual health 
inequity studies done in Asia [14, 42, 46], were often traumatic 
and seeking out help was usually faced with feelings of shame and 
taboo. The participants over time sought out menstrual educational 
information even if it rarely included seeking out medical help. In 
our study, they highlight a need for their own tracking method to 
be a facilitator in menstrual literacy and to include designs that 
would enable them to educate themselves on their bodies. 
In Kwak et al.’s work, irregular menstruation appeared to be 
associated with socioeconomic status, especially in terms of ed-
ucation and household income [48]. They found a tendency of 
low educational levels or highest quartile of household incomes to 
be at the highest risk for irregular menstrual cycles. The partici-
pants were largely drawn from medium-high afuent and educated 
menstruators, a population not found to have signifcantly high 
odds for irregular periods [48]. Yet, the proportion of the interview 
participants who self-reported irregular cycles ( 50%) was signif-
cantly higher than the U.S. average for individuals with irregular 
menstrual cycles of the similar age group (14%) [85]. The main 
factors that contributed to the higher likelihood of menstruation 
irregularity in the Kwak et al. study within high household income 
menstruators were job-related stress, physical and mental fatigue, 
irregular life patterns, dietary changes, and sleep deprivation. The 
reinforcement of mental and social resources such as social sup-
port and sense of control [51] were cited as contributors to higher 
education’s relationship to long-term health. The participants not 
only expressed similar afictions to those of high household income 
mesntruators in Kwak et al.’s study [48], but also lacked both mental 
and social resources such as guardian support and access to sexual 
education [51]. Their upbringing could explain why the percentage 
of the interview participants with self-reported irregular cycles was 
so high. 
On the other hand, we note that the participants self-diagnosed 
their cycles as "irregular" and did not seek out a medical prognosis. 
There could exist discrepancies between how they defned men-
strual irregularity and how the medical community defnes abnor-
malities. This gap in understanding what constitutes an "irregular" 
period may indicate additional hurdles users like the participants 
may face in getting to understand their bodies. Carey et al. notes 
that understanding health, especially in Western biomedical con-
texts, commonly places an emphasis on the individual as maker 
of "healthy" or "poor health" choices but not enough on the world 
segment that they share [16]. These gaps in understanding could 
be the result of an amalgam of societal structures [82] that produce 
a negative feedback loop of individuals not seeking out health aid 
but if they do, they are not provided with adequate support (e.g. 
relevant menstrual education). 
Another design consideration that current tracking methods 
have rarely incorporated, much less segregated based on selectivity, 
is menstrual data sharing. Glow, a menstrual tracking application, CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
shares content between the menstruating individual and her signif-
icant other who is automatically assumed as male. This assumption 
is not uncommon as Epstein et. al. found that menstrual tracking ap-
plications often assume a sexual partner or signifcant other is male 
[25]. What is uncommon is the ability for the partner to also receive 
notifcations and information about the menstruating individual’s 
tracked data. This functionality is met with mixed-feelings amongst 
the participants. Participants from all three methods were against 
sharing their menstrual data with anyone they knew. However, 
similar to Rooksby et al.’s observations that tracking is often not 
just personal but social and collaborative [66], the participants also 
did not want to keep the data all to themselves. Who the participant 
wanted to share with and to what extent varied from one user to 
the next. While some participants used texting their mothers as a 
tracking method, others said that they would feel very uncomfort-
able if their family knew. For who the participants wanted to share 
with, this category included many more than just their signifcant 
other as previous tracking methods seem to promote. For some of 
the participants, they wanted to share with friends, roommates, 
colleagues, and family and for other participants those were the 
same populations they did not want to share with. However, if the 
current application provided sharing capabilities, they were still 
unable to make these sharing distinctions. 
To summarize, we fnd that current menstrual tracking solutions 
often not only overlook gender and life stage contexts, but also 
transitioning into being or not being a menstruator, educational, 
cultural, sharing, sexual orientation, and impaired contexts as well. 
Recommendation: We suggest for current and future men-
strual tracking designs to address diferent life stages—birth control 
use, pregnancy, perimenopause, menopause, etc.—and transitions 
between those stages as well as transitions into being or not being 
a menstruator. Without these accommodations or transitions, we 
found that the participants have trouble continuing and return to 
their tracking methods. In addition, we also recommend designs 
to consider the following categories for more culturally responsive 
design: diferent age groups, impairments, race/nationalities, sex-
ual orientation, and illnesses relating to gendered health. We also 
suggest addressing menstrual health education disparities and to 
provide avenues and resources in which these individuals can seek 
help in interpreting their health data. For example, the participants 
in the PD session suggested having Q&A forums in their tracking 
method so that they could quickly seek out accessible menstrual 
health information. In addition, we point to projects like Labella 
that combine underwear and mobile phones as a tool to promote 
anatomy knowledge [5] and Menstrupedia, a digital platform de-
signed to bridge menstrual health education gaps [90], as potential 
guidance markers for future menstrual tracking methods in terms 
of promoting menstrual literacy. We point to Kaufman’s work for 
guidance in health education in addressing the intersections of 
health inequity and menstrual health [42]. 
Furthermore, future work in both menstrual tracking and health 
disparities could specifcally explore implications for college-educated 
individuals who are also lacking in basic menstrual health knowl-
edge especially in relation to menstrual "irregularities". Future work 
is also necessary to fully explore menstrual tracking designs across 
socioeconomic and education contexts and how these contexts 
afect an individual’s approach to menstrual health care.CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
Current applications rarely include sharing capabilities. How-
ever, we also suggest that if sharing capabilities are included, that 
they balance the user’s potential wants to connect and share with 
peers while maintaining strict privacy and limited access of others. 
5.2 "What Does My Data Mean?" 
Ruckenstein argues that in personal analytics, how people en-
gage and confront visualized data is just as important as the self-
monitoring device itself [67]. Her fndings suggest that visualized 
explanations can not only change how the user refects on them-
selves and their lives but also help them feel permanence, stability, 
and control. Her participants voiced how their self-tracking tech-
nology, with the ability to detect normalities and abnormalities, 
helped them understand what is physiologically valuable and worth 
pursuing. This sense of empowerment is not the case within the 
participants of our study on menstrual tracking. 
The participants felt the same feelings of control from entering 
data alone. They did not have tracking methods that provided them 
with easy access to personal analytics capabilities (e.g. some did not 
have any, others were behind pay walls), but they also did not seek 
alternatives for analyzing their entered data either. This gap became 
detrimental to the participants who came from backgrounds that 
did not provide them with enough menstrual health knowledge to 
understand the data themselves and prevented them from seeking 
out medical interpretation as well. They felt comforted from just 
entering data alone and did not realize anything could be wrong 
with their menstrual health (e.g. delayed diagnosis of PCOS). To 
echo Carey et al. sentiments, feelings of control in health "can be 
comforting but are ultimately useless in terms of maintaining the 
integrity of an organism in the absence of actual control" [16]. 
On the other hand, we also noticed a common theme amongst 
the participants who voiced that they would have liked to be able to 
view their logged data in data visualisations. In our PD, the partici-
pants made data visualisation and interaction a priority functional-
ity for their designs and held assumptions that these capabilities 
would help them interpret data about themselves, akin to the partici-
pants from Schroeder et al. study [73]. The participants in that study 
noted how having analyses and visualizations helped them interpret 
their self-tracked data in the context of their management goals. 
The need to interpret their data easily from home was especially 
important to the participants as they often held biases or hesitations 
towards seeking out menstrual care similar to participants from low 
income, low menstrual health education, high menstrual stigma, 
and/or high gender inequities backgrounds from multiple sexual 
health inequity studies [12, 14, 15, 17, 24, 42, 46, 64, 69, 74, 98]. 
From all three methods, current tracking users seem to associate 
tracking with personal analytics, yet were not provided with this 
functionality in their current method. 
Another interesting avenue for helping an individual under-
stand their data, is potentially through online health communi-
ties. Much work has shown the potential online health communi-
ties have in promoting empatheic and informational support (e.g., 
[40, 62, 63, 94, 99]). The participants in the PD session voiced many 
scenarios in which they felt comforted speaking to others with 
similar experiences and also gained valuable information on their 
own menstrual health. Lin et. al. 
Recommendation: The action of tracking allows the partici-
pants to alleviate some of the anxiety that surrounds their menstrual 
cycles. However, this mitigation can be detrimental when they at-
tribute their peace to being healthy. We suggest future menstrual 
designs to address their role in reassuring their users, as well as 
providing the ability for users to be able to make the connection 
between their tracked data and their health status. 
Current and future menstrual tracking designs could consider 
ways to better conceptualize or visualize logged menstrual data into 
trends, insights, and/or cause and efect sequences to help users 
understand how their entered information relates to their menstrual 
health. Future work could explore this impact data analytics and 
visualizations have in bridging the gap between entering data and 
interpreting menstrual health status. 
Designs might also consider ways to mitigate between how in-
dividuals start tracking their period and what individuals end up 
tracking. Additionally, designs that consider facilitating platforms 
for menstrual health discussions between individuals might provide 
them with not only more information, but comfort as well. 
5.3 Future Considerations For Ubiquitous 
Solutions 
The prevalent and unobtrusive nature of ubiquitous computing 
makes pervasive technologies appealing in the medical informatics 
space. Much work has demonstrated the potential of ubiquitous 
computing in facilitating healthcare delivery, tracking, and enhanc-
ing efectiveness for health [10, 56]. As follows, self-tracking devices 
have started to permeate into menstrual tracking as well, such as 
wearables2 and smart home devices (e.g., ambient light and color-
emitting mirrors [28, 34]). These products are not too diferent 
from the solutions the participants designed for themselves as the 
"perfect" tracker. However, the participants were unaware of all of 
these pre-existing solutions due to their limited knowledge of the 
menstrual technology market. 
Without any prior knowledge of existing ubiquitous menstrual 
tracking solutions, the participants focused on designs to make 
logging as painless, not intrusive, and adoptable as possible. Their 
design requirements warranted a pervasive solution. Many of them 
considered a wearable such as a smart watch as the easiest to adopt, 
use, and aforded the best privacy. This fnding follows another com-
mon theme of combining devices for diferent uses but all under the 
same purpose. As all of the participants came from industrialized 
and technology-rich backgrounds, adopting more technology into 
their daily routine was not foreign to them. The participants envi-
sioned logging their data with a wearable and then viewing their 
data on a smartphone or computer as the smoothest transition. The 
participants, even when given the option to have "fantastical" and 
"impossible" trackers, still prioritized readily available solutions 
rather than design concepts that were out of their comfort zones. 
In addition, menstrual health data sharing for the participants re-
quired careful curation and as such, also prioritized private and 
customizable solutions. In the environments the participants grew 
up in, especially for those with high menstrual stigma, sharing such 
information with others could either be vital or intrusive . 
2my.Flow, LOONCUPInvestigating Culturally Responsive Design for Menstrual Tracking and Sharing Practices 
As more ubiquitous menstrual tracking solutions proliferate 
the market, designers should consider not only what the technol-
ogy tracks and the data it provides, but also the ease of integra-
tion of their solution and how it might interact with existing non-
ubiquitous solutions. For users that are concerned over who else has 
access to their data, designers should account for the security and 
privacy they provide their users, their data, and their data sharing. 
Recommendation: We suggest future menstrual tracking de-
signs to address menstrual logging motivations and ease of routine 
integration. We also suggest looking into the potential of not only 
ubiquitous computational menstrual tracking solutions, but also 
how these solutions might interact with each other across platforms 
in private and secure ways. 
6 CONCLUSION 
We used a combination of methods to investigate period tracking 
and sharing practices around menstruating young and educated 
individuals with minimal menstrual education backgrounds. We 
found there are multiple design attributes that invoke feelings of 
alienation and anxiety among the participants such as a lack of 
consideration for changes in life stage, transitions into being or 
not being a menstruator menstrual educational background, and 
with whom and to what extent they would be willing to share men-
strual data. In particular, we discuss a potential blind spot in the 
literature on menstrual tracking applications and health disparities: 
menstruating individuals who are college-educated but not ade-
quately informed about menstrual health particularities. Although 
the participants were relatively afuent and educated menstruators, 
they knew little about their own bodies due to their more conser-
vative upbringing and this was likely to put their own health at 
risk. Future work could further explore this potential menstrual 
tracking design and health disparity gap. In addition, we found that 
analyzing data as it pertains to an individual’s menstrual health, 
especially when that individual has minimal menstrual education, is 
important for the participants. With hesitations in seeking out pro-
fessional care, the participants emphasize a need to visualize their 
data over time, interpret abnormalities within their logged data 
accurately, and communicating with other individuals with similar 
experiences without leaving home. Finally, we provide insight into 
the design attributes the participants deem absolutely critical for 
future menstrual tracking solutions—integration with menstrual 
health education, relatively quick and easy to adopt now, accessible, 
culturally responsive, private and secured, can be customized, and 
can provide many actionable insights based on previously entered 
data. 
REFERENCES 
[1] [n.d.]. LOONLAB. http://www.loonlab.com/. (Accessed on 05/02/2020). 
[2] [n.d.]. my.Flow - my.Flow. http://www.trackmyfow.com/myfow.html. (Ac-
cessed on 05/02/2020). 
[3] Teresa Almeida, Madeline Balaam, Shaowen Bardzell, and Lone Koefoed Hansen. 
2020. Introduction to the Special Issue on HCI and the Body: Reimagining 
Women’s Health. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 27, 4, Article 20 (Aug. 
2020), 32 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3406091 
[4] Teresa Almeida, Rob Comber, and Madeline Balaam. 2016. HCI and Intimate 
Care as an Agenda for Change in Women’s Health. In Proceedings of the 2016 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2599–2611. 
[5] Teresa Almeida, Rob Comber, Gavin Wood, Dean Saraf, and Madeline Balaam. 
2016. On looking at the vagina through Labella. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1810–1821. CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
[6] Madeline Balaam, Rob Comber, Ed Jenkins, Selina Sutton, and Andrew Garbett. 
2015. FeedFinder: a location-mapping mobile application for breastfeeding 
women. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. 1709–1718. 
[7] Jefrey Bardzell, Shaowen Bardzell, Amanda Lazar, and Norman Makoto Su. 
2019. (Re-) Framing Menopause Experiences for HCI and Design. In Proceedings 
of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13. 
[8] Shaowen Bardzell. 2010. Feminist HCI: taking stock and outlining an agenda for 
design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing 
systems. 1301–1310. 
[9] Shaowen Bardzell and Jefrey Bardzell. 2011. Towards a Feminist HCI Method-
ology: Social Science, Feminism, and HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CHI 
’11). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 675–684. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979041 
[10] Oliver J Bott, E Ammenwerth, B Brigl, P Knaup, E Lang, R Pilgram, B Pfeifer, F 
Ruderich, AC Wolf, R Haux, et al. 2005. The challenge of ubiquitous computing 
in health care: technology, concepts and solutions. Methods of Information in 
Medicine 44, 03 (2005), 473–479. 
[11] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. 
Qualitative research in psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101. 
[12] Haywood L Brown, Maria J Small, Camille A Clare, and Washington Hill. 2020. 
Black women health inequity the origin of perinatal health disparity. Journal of 
the National Medical Association (2020). 
[13] Emeline Brulé and Katta Spiel. 2019. Negotiating gender and disability identities 
in participatory design. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on 
Communities & Technologies-Transforming Communities. 218–227. 
[14] Thanh Cong Bui, Christine M Markham, Michael W Ross, Mark L Williams, 
R Palmer Beasley, Ly TH Tran, Huong TH Nguyen, and Thach Ngoc Le. 2012. 
Dimensions of gender relations and reproductive health inequity perceived by 
female undergraduate students in the Mekong Delta of Vietnam: a qualitative 
exploration. International Journal for Equity in Health 11, 1 (2012), 1–11. 
[15] Vicky Bungay. 2013. Health care among street-involved women: The perpetua-
tion of health inequity. Qualitative Health Research 23, 8 (2013), 1016–1026. 
[16] Timothy A Carey, Sara J Tai, and Robert Grifths. 2021. Deconstructing Health 
Inequity: A Perceptual Control Theory Perspective. Springer Nature. 
[17] Rasheeta Chandler, Dominique Guillaume, Andrea Parker, Jessica Wells, and 
Natalie D Hernandez. 2021. Developing Culturally Tailored mHealth Tools 
to Address Sexual and Reproductive Health Outcomes Among Black and 
Latina Women: A Systematic Review. Health Promotion Practice (2021), 
15248399211002831. 
[18] Rasheeta Chandler, Dominique Guillaume, Andrea G Parker, Sierra Carter, and 
Natalie D Hernandez. 2020. Promoting Optimal Sexual and Reproductive Health 
with Mobile Health Tools for Black Women: Combining Technology, Culture and 
Context. Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health 52, 4 (2020), 205–209. 
[19] Mayara Costa Figueiredo, Clara Caldeira, Tera L. Reynolds, Sean Victory, Kai 
Zheng, and Yunan Chen. 2017. Self-Tracking for Fertility Care: Collaborative 
Support for a Highly Personalized Problem. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 
1, CSCW, Article 36 (Dec. 2017), 21 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3134671 
[20] Catherine D’Ignazio, Alexis Hope, Becky Michelson, Robyn Churchill, and 
Ethan Zuckerman. 2016. A Feminist HCI Approach to Designing Postpartum 
Technologies: " When I frst saw a breast pump I was wondering if it was a 
joke". In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. 2612–2622. 
[21] Kevin Doherty, José Marcano-Belisario, Martin Cohn, Nikolaos Mastellos, Cecily 
Morrison, Josip Car, and Gavin Doherty. 2019. Engagement with Mental Health 
Screening on Mobile Devices: Results from an Antenatal Feasibility Study. In 
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
1–15. 
[22] Ian Douglas and Zhengjie Liu. 2011. Global usability. Springer Science & 
Business Media. 
[23] Anna Eaglin and Shaowen Bardzell. 2011. Sex toys and designing for sexual 
wellness. In CHI’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
1837–1842. 
[24] Catherine E Elmore, Jessica Keim-Malpass, and Emma McKim Mitchell. 2021. 
Health Inequity in Cervical Cancer Control Among Refugee Women in the 
United States by Country of Origin. Health Equity 5, 1 (2021), 119–123. 
[25] Daniel A Epstein, Nicole B Lee, Jennifer H Kang, Elena Agapie, Jessica Schroeder, 
Laura R Pina, James Fogarty, Julie A Kientz, and Sean Munson. 2017. Examin-
ing menstrual tracking to inform the design of personal informatics tools. In 
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
6876–6888. 
[26] Joanna N Erdman, Kinga Jelinska, and Susan Yanow. 2018. Understandings of 
self-managed abortion as health inequity, harm reduction and social change. 
Reproductive health matters 26, 54 (2018), 13–19. 
[27] Jordan Eschler, Amanda Menking, Sarah Fox, and Uba Backonja. 2019. Defning 
Menstrual Literacy With the Aim of Evaluating Mobile Menstrual Tracking 
Applications. CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing 37, 12 (2019), 638–646.CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
[28] Margaret Flemings, Shanzay Kazmi, Rachel Pak, and Orit Shaer. 2018. Crimson 
Wave: Shedding Light on Menstrual Health. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Interna-
tional Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (Stockholm, 
Sweden) (TEI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
343–348. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173225.3173292 
[29] Sarah Fox and Daniel A Epstein. 2020. Monitoring Menses: Design-Based 
Investigations of Menstrual Tracking Applications. In The Palgrave Handbook 
of Critical Menstruation Studies. Palgrave Macmillan, Singapore, 733–750. 
[30] Sarah Fox, Noura Howell, Richmond Wong, and Franchesca Spektor. 2019. 
Vivewell: Speculating Near-Future Menstrual Tracking through Current Data 
Practices. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 
(San Diego, CA, USA) (DIS ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 541–552. https://doi.org/10.1145/3322276.3323695 
[31] Sarah E. Fox, Amanda Menking, Jordan Eschler, and Uba Backonja. 2020. Mul-
tiples Over Models: Interrogating the Past and Collectively Reimagining the 
Future of Menstrual Sensemaking. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 27, 4, 
Article 22 (Sept. 2020), 24 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3397178 
[32] Leo A Goodman. 1961. Snowball sampling. The annals of mathematical statistics 
(1961), 148–170. 
[33] Edward Twitchell Hall. 1989. Beyond culture. Anchor. 
[34] Sarah Homewood. 2018. Designing for the Changing Body: A Feminist Ex-
ploration of Self-Tracking Technologies. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI 
EA ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 
DC11, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3173031 
[35] Sarah Homewood. 2019. Inaction as a design decision: Refections on not 
designing self-tracking tools for menopause. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–12. 
[36] Rita Ismail, Lauri A Linder, Catherine Fiona MacPherson, and Nancy Fu-
gate Woods. 2016. Feasibility of an iPad application for studying menopause-
related symptom clusters and women’s heuristics. Informatics for Health and 
Social Care 41, 3 (2016), 247–266. 
[37] Minal Jain and Pradeep Yammiyavar. 2015. Game based learning tool seeking 
peer support for empowering adolescent girls in rural Assam. In Proceedings of 
the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children. 275–278. 
[38] Matthew R Jamnik and David J Lane. 2017. The use of Reddit as an inexpensive 
source for high-quality data. Practical Assessment, Research, and Evaluation 22, 
1 (2017), 5. 
[39] Reihaneh Jarrahi, Nahid Golmakani, and Seyyed Reza Mazlom. 2020. Compari-
son of the efect of menstrual health education with peer-based and small-group 
approaches on adolescent girls’ health behaviors, a clinical trial. Evidence Based 
Care (2020). 
[40] Allen C Johnston, James L Worrell, Paul M Di Gangi, and Molly Wasko. 2013. 
Online health communities: An assessment of the infuence of participation on 
patient empowerment outcomes. Information Technology & People (2013). 
[41] Gopinaath Kannabiran, Alex A Ahmed, Matthew Wood, Madeline Balaam, 
Joshua G Tanenbaum, Shaowen Bardzell, and Jefrey Bardzell. 2018. Design for 
sexual wellbeing in HCI. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–7. 
[42] Joan Kaufman. 2005. China: the intersections between poverty, health inequity, 
reproductive health and HIV/AIDS. Development 48, 4 (2005), 113–119. 
[43] Jiro Kawakita. 1991. The original KJ method. Tokyo: Kawakita Research Institute 
5 (1991). 
[44] Os Keyes, Burren Peil, Rua M Williams, and Katta Spiel. 2020. Reimagining 
(women’s) health: HCI, gender and essentialised embodiment. ACM Transactions 
on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 27, 4 (2020), 1–42. 
[45] Julie A Kientz, Rosa I Arriaga, and Gregory D Abowd. 2009. Baby steps: evalua-
tion of a system to support record-keeping for parents of young children. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
1713–1722. 
[46] Anant Kumar. 2007. Health inequity and women’s self-help groups in India: 
The role of caste and class. Health Sociology Review 16, 2 (2007), 160–168. 
[47] Neha Kumar, Naveena Karusala, Azra Ismail, and Anupriya Tuli. 2020. Tak-
ing the Long, Holistic, and Intersectional View to Women’s Wellbeing. ACM 
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 27, 4 (2020), 1–32. 
[48] Yeunhee Kwak, Yoonjung Kim, and Kyoung Ah Baek. 2019. Prevalence of 
irregular menstruation according to socioeconomic status: A population-based 
nationwide cross-sectional study. PloS one 14, 3 (2019), e0214071. 
[49] Amanda Lazar, Norman Makoto Su, Jefrey Bardzell, and Shaowen Bardzell. 
2019. Parting the red sea: Sociotechnical systems and lived experiences of 
menopause. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. 1–16. 
[50] Inseong Lee, Gi Woong Choi, Jinwoo Kim, Solyung Kim, Kiho Lee, Daniel Kim, 
Myunghee Han, Seung Yong Park, and Yongil An. 2008. Cultural dimensions 
for user experience: Cross-country and cross-product analysis of users’ cultural 
characteristics. People and Computers XXII Culture, Creativity, Interaction 22 
(2008), 3–12. Lin et. al. 
[51] MS Lee. 2005. Health inequalities among Korean adults: socioeconomic status 
and residential area diferences. Korean J Sociol 39, 6 (2005), 183–209. 
[52] Mirim Lee, Bon-chang Koo, Hee-seok Jeong, Joongsing Park, Juhee Cho, and 
Jundong Cho. 2015. Designing mHealth intervention for women in menopausal 
period. In 2015 9th International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies 
for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth). IEEE, 257–260. 
[53] Mirim Lee, Bon-chang Koo, Hee-seok Jeong, Joongsin Park, Juhee Cho, and Jun-
dong Cho. 2015. Understanding Women’s Needs in Menopause for Development 
of mHealth. In Proceedings of the 2015 Workshop on Pervasive Wireless Healthcare. 
51–56. 
[54] Raymond Luong and Anna M Lomanowska. 2021. Evaluating Reddit as a Crowd-
sourcing Platform for Psychology Research Projects. Teaching of Psychology 
(2021), 00986283211020739. 
[55] Deborah Lupton. 2013. Understanding the human machine [Commentary]. IEEE 
Technology and Society Magazine 32, 4 (2013), 25–30. 
[56] Deborah Lupton. 2014. Quantifed Sex: A Critical Analysis of Sexual and Re-
productive Self-Tracking Using Apps. Culture, health & sexuality 17 (06 2014), 
1–14. https://doi.org/10.1080/13691058.2014.920528 
[57] Deborah Lupton. 2014. Self-tracking modes: Refexive self-monitoring and data 
practices. Available at SSRN 2483549 (2014). 
[58] JoAnn E Manson, Jefrey M Ames, Marla Shapiro, Margery LS Gass, Jan L Shifren, 
Cynthia A Stuenkel, JoAnn V Pinkerton, Andrew M Kaunitz, Diane T Pace, 
Risa Kagan, et al. 2015. Algorithm and mobile app for menopausal symptom 
management and hormonal/non-hormonal therapy decision making: a clinical 
decision-support tool from The North American Menopause Society. Menopause
22, 3 (2015), 247–253. 
[59] Sonali R. Mishra, Predrag Klasnja, John MacDufe Woodburn, Eric B. Hekler, 
Larsson Omberg, Michael Kellen, and Lara Mangravite. 2019. Supporting Coping 
with Parkinson’s Disease Through Self Tracking. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) 
(CHI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–16. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300337 
[60] Michelle Moglia, Henry Nguyen, Kathy Chyjek, Katherine Chen, and Paula Cas-
taño. 2016. Evaluation of Smartphone Menstrual Cycle Tracking Applications 
Using an Adapted APPLICATIONS Scoring System. Obstetrics and gynecology 
127 (05 2016). https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000001444 
[61] Michelle L Moglia, Henry V Nguyen, Kathy Chyjek, Katherine T Chen, and 
Paula M Castaño. 2016. Evaluation of smartphone menstrual cycle tracking 
applications using an adapted APPLICATIONS scoring system. Obstetrics & 
Gynecology 127, 6 (2016), 1153–1160. 
[62] Priya Nambisan. 2011. Information seeking and social support in online health 
communities: impact on patients’ perceived empathy. Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association 18, 3 (2011), 298–304. 
[63] Lisa Neal, Kate Oakley, Gitte Lindgaard, David Kaufman, Jan Marco Leimeister, 
and Ted Selker. 2007. Online health communities. In CHI’07 Extended Abstracts 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2129–2132. 
[64] Don Operario, Kristi E Gamarel, Benjamin M Grin, Ji Hyun Lee, Christopher W 
Kahler, Brandon DL Marshall, Jacob J van den Berg, and Nickolas D Zaller. 
2015. Sexual minority health disparities in adult men and women in the United 
States: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2001–2010. American 
journal of public health 105, 10 (2015), e27–e34. 
[65] Tamara Peyton, Erika Poole, Madhu Reddy, Jennifer Kraschnewski, and Cyn-
thia Chuang. 2014. " Every pregnancy is diferent" designing mHealth for the 
pregnancy ecology. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive 
systems. 577–586. 
[66] John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and Matthew Chalmers. 2014. 
Personal tracking as lived informatics. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference 
on human factors in computing systems. 1163–1172. 
[67] Minna Ruckenstein. 2014. Visualized and interacted life: Personal analytics and 
engagements with data doubles. Societies 4, 1 (2014), 68–84. 
[68] Luciana Salgado, Roberto Pereira, and Isabela Gasparini. 2015. Cultural issues 
in HCI: challenges and opportunities. In International Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction. Springer, 60–70. 
[69] Udani Samarasekera and Richard Horton. 2017. Women’s cancers: shining a 
light on a neglected health inequity. The Lancet 389, 10071 (2017), 771–773. 
[70] Uchechukwu KA Sampson, Robert M Kaplan, Richard S Cooper, Ana V 
Diez Roux, James S Marks, Michael M Engelgau, Emmanuel Peprah, Helena 
Mishoe, L Ebony Boulware, Kaytura L Felix, et al. 2016. Reducing health in-
equities in the US: recommendations from the NHLBI’s Health Inequities Think 
Tank Meeting. Journal of the American College of Cardiology 68, 5 (2016), 517– 
524. 
[71] Marilyn M Schapira, Mary Ann Gilligan, Timothy McAulife, Gwenn Garmon, 
Molly Carnes, and Ann B Nattinger. 2007. Decision-making at menopause: a 
randomized controlled trial of a computer-based hormone therapy decision-aid. 
Patient education and counseling 67, 1-2 (2007), 100–107. 
[72] Jessica Schroeder, Chia-Fang Chung, Daniel A. Epstein, Ravi Karkar, Adele Par-
sons, Natalia Murinova, James Fogarty, and Sean A. Munson. 2018. Examining 
Self-Tracking by People with Migraine: Goals, Needs, and Opportunities inInvestigating Culturally Responsive Design for Menstrual Tracking and Sharing Practices 
a Chronic Health Condition. In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive 
Systems Conference (Hong Kong, China) (DIS ’18). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 135–148. https://doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196738 
[73] Jessica Schroeder, Ravi Karkar, Natalia Murinova, James Fogarty, and Sean A. 
Munson. 2019. Examining Opportunities for Goal-Directed Self-Tracking to 
Support Chronic Condition Management. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable 
Ubiquitous Technol. 3, 4, Article 151 (Dec. 2019), 26 pages. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/3369809 
[74] Gita Sen and Piroska Östlin. 2008. Gender inequity in health: why it exists and 
how we can change it. 
[75] Annie D Smith, Alfred Muli, Kellogg J Schwab, and Julie Hennegan. 2020. Na-
tional Monitoring for Menstrual Health and Hygiene: Is the Type of Menstrual 
Material Used Indicative of Needs Across 10 Countries? International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health 17, 8 (2020), 2633. 
[76] Marni Sommer, Jennifer S Hirsch, Constance Nathanson, and Richard G Parker. 
2015. Comfortably, safely, and without shame: defning menstrual hygiene 
management as a public health issue. American Journal of Public Health 105, 7 
(2015), 1302–1311. 
[77] S Sood, S Stevens, M Okumura, A Ramaiya, and M Hauer. 2020. Everywhere is 
Nowhere: A Systematic Review of Menstrual Health and Hygiene Management 
(MHHM) as a Human Right. (2020). 
[78] Katta Spiel. 2019. Body-positive computing as a means to counteract normative 
biases in ftness trackers. XRDS: Crossroads, The ACM Magazine for Students 25, 
4 (2019), 34–37. 
[79] Katta Spiel, Oliver L Haimson, and Danielle Lottridge. 2019. How to do better 
with gender on surveys: a guide for HCI researchers. interactions 26, 4 (2019), 
62–65. 
[80] Clay Spinuzzi. 2005. The methodology of participatory design. Technical 
communication 52, 2 (2005), 163–174. 
[81] Katarzyna Stawarz, Anna L Cox, and Ann Blandford. 2015. Beyond self-tracking 
and reminders: designing smartphone apps that support habit formation. In 
Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in computing 
systems. 2653–2662. 
[82] Elizabeth Stowell, Mercedes C Lyson, Herman Saksono, Reneé C Wurth, Holly 
Jimison, Misha Pavel, and Andrea G Parker. 2018. Designing and evaluating 
mHealth interventions for vulnerable populations: A systematic review. In 
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
1–17. 
[83] Hyewon Suh, John R Porter, Alexis Hiniker, and Julie A Kientz. 2014. @ 
BabySteps: design and evaluation of a system for using twitter for tracking 
children’s developmental milestones. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2279–2288. 
[84] Melanie Swan. 2009. Emerging patient-driven health care models: an examina-
tion of health social networks, consumer personalized medicine and quantifed 
self-tracking. International journal of environmental research and public health 6, 
2 (2009), 492–525. 
[85] Mary Gayle Sweet, Tarin A Schmidt-Dalton, Patrice M Weiss, and Keith P 
Madsen. 2012. Evaluation and management of abnormal uterine bleeding in 
premenopausal women. American Family Physician 85, 1 (2012), 35–43. 
[86] Elena Tofol, Päivikki Koponen, Riitta Luoto, and Timo Partonen. 2014. Pubertal 
timing, menstrual irregularity, and mental health: results of a population-based 
study. Archives of Women’s mental Health 17, 2 (2014), 127–135. 
[87] Giulia Tomasello and Teresa Almeida. 2020. Empowerment and Self-Care: 
Designing for the Female Body. Crafting Anatomies: The Body as Site in Fashion 
and Textile Research Practice (2020). 
[88] Bonnie Tran and Lee Na Choi. 2018. Menstrual maze: A toy exploring public 
engagement in menstrual health education. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–6. 
[89] Amaury Trujillo and Maria Claudia Buzzi. 2016. Participatory User Require-
ments Elicitation for Personal Menopause App. In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (Gothenburg, Sweden) (NordiCHI 
’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 102, 
6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/2971485.2996737 
[90] Anupriya Tuli, Shaan Chopra, Neha Kumar, and Pushpendra Singh. 2018. Learn-
ing from and with Menstrupedia: Towards menstrual health education in India. 
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–20. 
[91] Anupriya Tuli, Shaan Chopra, Pushpendra Singh, and Neha Kumar. 2020. Men-
strual (Im) Mobilities and Safe Spaces. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–15. 
[92] Anupriya Tuli, Shruti Dalvi, Neha Kumar, and Pushpendra Singh. 2019. “It’sa 
girl thing” Examining Challenges and Opportunities around Menstrual Health 
Education in India. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 
26, 5 (2019), 1–24. 
[93] Agatha Tutia, Kelda Baljon, Lan Vu, and Daniela K Rosner. 2019. HCI and 
Menopause: Designing with and around the Aging Body. In Extended Abstracts 
of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–8. 
[94] Martijn Van der Eijk, Marjan J Faber, Johanna WM Aarts, Jan AM Kremer, Marten 
Munneke, and Bastiaan R Bloem. 2013. Using online health communities to CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
deliver patient-centered care to people with chronic conditions. Journal of 
medical Internet research 15, 6 (2013), e115. 
[95] Joyce Varughese and Susan Richman. 2010. Cancer care inequity for women in 
resource-poor countries. Reviews in Obstetrics and Gynecology 3, 3 (2010), 122. 
[96] Tifany C Veinot, Jessica S Ancker, Heather Cole-Lewis, Elizabeth D Mynatt, 
Andrea G Parker, Katie A Siek, and Lena Mamykina. 2019. Leveling up: on the 
potential of upstream health informatics interventions to enhance health equity. 
Medical care 57 (2019), S108–S114. 
[97] Tifany C Veinot, Hannah Mitchell, and Jessica S Ancker. 2018. Good intentions 
are not enough: how informatics interventions can worsen inequality. Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association 25, 8 (2018), 1080–1088. 
[98] Alicia Williamson, Andrea Barbarin, Bettina Campbell, Terrance Campbell, Su-
san Franzen, Thomas M Reischl, Marc Zimmerman, Tifany Christine Veinot, 
et al. 2021. Uptake of and Engagement With an Online Sexual Health Inter-
vention (HOPE eIntervention) Among African American Young Adults: Mixed 
Methods Study. Journal of medical Internet research 23, 7 (2021), e22203. 
[99] Zhijun Yan, Tianmei Wang, Yi Chen, and Han Zhang. 2016. Knowledge sharing 
in online health communities: A social exchange theory perspective. Information 
& management 53, 5 (2016), 643–653. 
[100] Alyson L Young and Andrew D Miller. 2019. " This Girl is on Fire" Sensemaking 
in an Online Health Community for Vulvodynia. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13. 
[101] Rhonda Zwingerman, Michael Chaikof, and Claire Jones. 2020. A Critical 
Appraisal of Fertility and Menstrual Tracking Apps for the iPhone. Journal of 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology Canada 42, 5 (2020), 583–590.