The Privilege of Immersion: Racial and Ethnic  
Experiences, Perceptions , and  Beliefs  in Digital Gaming  
Cale J. Passmore  
University of Saskatchewan  
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan  
cale.passmore@usask.ca  Max V. Birk  
University of Saskatchewan  
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan  
max.birk@usask.ca  Regan L. Mandryk  
University of Saskatchewan  
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan  
regan.mandryk@usask.ca  
ABSTRACT  
People  of color comprise  a large proportion of the US play-
er base, yet are systematically and grossly  underrepresented 
in digital game s. We constructed a survey to assess  if play-
ers perceive this underrepresentation, how they experience 
these representation s, and sample  their beliefs about diver-
sity and gaming. Mixed -methods analyses show significant 
differences between players of color and White players on 
perception of racial norms in gaming, effects on behavior, 
emotions, player satisfaction, engagement , and beliefs 
stemming from a lack of diversity. Players from all races -
ethnicities overwhelmingly expressed a desire for greater 
diversity. We discuss reasons why our methodology show s 
higher dissatisfaction than previous research and discuss 
our findings in the context of industry’s challenge to meet 
audience demands for greater ra cial diversity in games . 
Author Keywords  
Race; ethnicity; identification;  representation;  immersion; 
digital games; racialized experiences; diversity; norm s 
ACM Classification Keywords  
K.8.0 [Personal Computing]: General - Games.   
INTRODUCTION  
Digital media is surpassing other forms of media (e.g., 
movies, music) in terms of popularity and consumer spend-
ing [41]. Digital g ames are not only enjoyed by a  diverse 
range of players  [42,153] , but a greater proportion of people 
of color play games  [3,7] , identify as gamers  [42], and own 
a gaming system  [107]  than their White non -Hispanic coun-
terparts . Players of color are a faster -growing market, pro-
jected to overtake the economic buying power of White 
non-Hispanic Americans  [47,101 –103,105,108,119] .  
Although people of color play games, buy games, and iden-
tify as gamers  in greater  proportion than White players, 
characters of color  are vastly underrepresented in commer-
cial games ; rates of main and secondary characters of color 
in games released by AAA studios  are as low as 1% for Hispanic/Latinx and 0% for Native American main chara c-
ters in some studies [11,42,48,53, 96,153] . Although it is 
reasonable to assume that racial diversity may be better in 
games released by indie studios —similar to how streaming 
models have improved racial diversity over traditional tele-
vision broadcasting —a recent content analysis of indi e 
games shows an equally dismal  (and declining ) representa-
tion of racial diversity  [117] . 
Even where racially -diverse character creation options are 
present, studies continue to find a persistent and emergent 
whiteness: White avatars remain the “default” option ; non-
White  skin-tone choices  are superimposed on  White physi-
cal features (what Marriott term s “high -tech blackface”  
[84]). In the context of character creation, t his can leave 
players  of color  who wish to self-represent  settling for op-
tions that are  “skin deep”  [17,36,68,92,109] . Uncanny n on-
White character s features  signal racial diversity as an after-
thought  and players of color notice  their post-hoc “inclu-
sion” [98,99,138,157] .  
Lack of in-game racial diversity compromises  player expe-
rience  for people of color  [158] ; pigeonholes them to spe-
cific genres  in which they are  represented (e.g. sport and 
military games have the highest proportion of both African 
American  characters  and players  [78]); renders the cogni-
tive, emotional, and socia l benefits of gaming less accessi-
ble [3,137,151,158] ; ignores social and moral imperatives 
for equal representation; and underserves a market eager for 
games with which they can identify [66]. Using Identity -
Based Motivation Theory , Critical Race Theory , and Social 
Identity Theory, we explore d the experiences of players of 
color through  mixed -methods analysis of an online survey 
about racial -ethnic  experience s in digital games .  
We demonstrate differences between players of color and 
White players on the perception of racial -ethnic  norms in 
gaming and experience s of stereotypes  as well a s the effects 
of underrepresentation on behavior, emotions, satisfaction, 
feelings of immersion, affiliation, and beliefs. Further, we 
demonstrate how sensitive and race-/ethnicity -centric re-
search methods can overcome the learned neutrality of peo-
ple of c olor coping under White norms  [24,81,136] , which  
leads to the under -reporting of racialized experiences . 
People of color do not have equal access to play accurate 
self-representations and show high er rates of perceived, 
experienced, and expected misrepresentation  in digital 
games  compared to their White peers . Our wo rk describes  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full cit ation on the first page. Copyrights for com-
ponents of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Ab-
stracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post 
on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permiss ion 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org . 
 
CHI 2018 , April 21 –26, 2018, Montreal, QC, Canada  
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.  
ACM ISBN 978 -1-4503 -5620 -6/18/04…$15.00  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173957  
 
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 1the imbalance d and differential  access  to gaming’s  benefits 
based on race -ethnicity , and contributes to  an important  
discussion on ways  to address  what is best  characterized a t 
this point as  the “privilege of immersi on.”  
RELATED LITERATURE  
What is the Current S tate of Racial Diversity  in Games ? 
A 2001 study [53] of top -selling games across six consoles 
showed that  more than half of all human characters were 
White (56%) , one-fifth Black (22%), about one -tenth 
Asian/Pacific Islanders (9%),  2% Latino [x], and almost 
none were Native American or multiracial (0.2% each). 
Types of characters by race varied: 87% of  heroes were 
White  while  86% of African -American female characters 
were categorized as "props, bystanders, or participants in 
games, but never competitors. […] Not one main character 
was Latina, and Native American characters were “essen-
tially invisible” [53].  
Similar studies on representation in digital games from 
2009 [153] , 2013 [36], 2014 [96], 2015  [48], and 2017  
[117] show  racial -ethnic  diversity  is worsening . White main 
characters remain over -represented ( 85.0%) in games ; 
Black (9. 7%); Biracial (3. 7%); and Asian main characters 
(1.7%) much less present  [153] . A 2014  study of the top 10 
highest -ranked games from 2007 -2012 [48] showed Afri-
can-American and Asian characters each had 3% represen-
tation among  main protagonists; Latinx a mere 1%  and no 
representations of Native or Indigenous peoples [48]. White 
protagonists, on the other hand, comprise d 67% of m ain 
characters and 75% of the Japanese -developed games [28]. 
Even where games  center character  creation, Dietrich’s  
2013 study found, “ the vast majority  of virtual worlds lack 
truly non -white (specifically black) characters; they simply 
cannot be made in t hose environments ” [36]. Although in-
die games  can deviate from many industry norms, improv-
ing racial diversity is not among them:  Asian s (8.2%), 
Black s (6.1%), Hispanics (0%) , and Native Americans 
(2.0%) are underrepresented  as protagonists  [117] . 
What is the State of D iversity in  the G ames  Industry?  
Underrepresentation of non-White characters  in games mir-
rors the underrepresentation of people of color employed by 
game companies  [43]. In 2 005, 83.3% of game developers 
were White , 7.5% were Asian, 2.5 % were Hispanic, and 2% 
were B lack [5]. These numbers have fluctuate d over the last 
decade in USA and the UK but remain well below current 
population (and player) proportions  [5,43,133] . Low rates 
of ch aracters of color in tandem with low rates of develop-
ers of color suggest s that a “creating what you know” prin-
ciple is in effect [109,128,153]  in the  digital  game industry . 
However, research suggests that both developers and p lay-
ers are aligned in their desire for greater in -game diversity 
[5,29,109,128,133] . Ranked as the third most important 
factor in industry growth, 53% of developers felt diversity 
in storytelling should be  a priority. Sexism among g amers 
(57%), sexism in games (52%), racism among gamers 
(36%) , and racism in games (25%) were labelled primary reasons for society’s negative perception s of gaming [43]. 
Reasons for wanted but unmet diversity range from histori-
cal explanations and systemic racism to White norms and 
“risk” aversion due to  high production costs .  
Why S hould the G ames Industry C are about D iversity ? 
The psycho -social effects of unacknowledged racism and 
discrimination have a host of associated negativ e effects 
[49,63,89,111,126,130,135,145,154] . Self -discrepancy the-
ory [60,61]  has long associated experiences of discrimina-
tion—events where one’s sense of self conflicts with fre-
quent divergent and negative representations —with depres-
sion, anxiety, shame, low self -worth, and low resiliency [7–
9,27,65,71,94,132] . Continual  exposure to negative repre-
sentations is tied to  uncertai nty [75], demotivation, and 
psychological disengagement [50,81,94 ,136] . Yet, research 
shows representation and digital gam ing can reinforce  self-
schemas and benefit identity resilience [12,36,37,58,134] , 
increase perspective -taking  [13,37,151] , and facilitate high-
er regard for individual differences [13,58,108] . Digital 
gaming can correct systemic discrimination or can intensify 
it depending on the awareness of those creating  player ex-
periences —thus placing a social and moral responsibility  
on developers where health  factors  are implicated.   
Greater  racial -ethnic diversity —even centralizing non -
White characters and narratives —is not  a risk  in other me-
dia forms . Rather than alienating White American viewers, 
Nielsen ratings show that emphasizing diversity is socially 
and financially advantageous  [127,131] . Non -White cen-
tered media increases yearly  in top -ten rankings [104,131] . 
Ratings and sales improve when ca st diversity  mirrors actu-
al diversity of its audience:  which, for  American s, means 
40% minority representation [104,1 27]. The same longitu-
dinal studies show when representation  rates  decline, view-
ership does too [104] . Losses are experienced by industry 
through the alienation of its  market [46,89,99,102,103] ; 
players of color , pigeon -holed into specific genre s, rein-
force stereotypes  [78,134]  and in turn show lower commit-
ment from some players [138] . Public opinion cites this 
lack of regard for diversity as central to gaming’s poor pub-
lic perception, with lack of diversity reinforcing negative 
social stereotypes about gaming and gamers 
[20,29,109,128,138,156] . Developers share player frustra-
tions with  misrepresentation  and underrepresentation 
[5,43,128,133,156] . Beyond the far more important social 
factors linked to racial -ethnic diversity  [147] , low racial -
ethnic diversity makes for  a volatile industry model .   
Understanding the Challenges Behind Greater D iversity  
Technical Challenge s 
Current efforts to racial ly and ethnic ally diversif y are large-
ly ineffective . Even whe n avatar customization is available, 
skin-tone variations are often insufficient , ignor ing nuances  
like pigment undertone [17,36,68,77,93,109,128,157] , 
White actors voic ing non-White characters  [33], and char-
acters of color given  White physical features or behav e in-
authentic  to their culture [35,59,83,97,110,128] . These 
transgressions may not b e as readily perceived by White 
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 2developers as they are by players of color , but those who  
live their racial -ethnic identity  experience them as clearly  as 
theatrical blackface  or minstrelsy [76,77,98,99,138,157] . 
Tran sition from current norms to accurate representation of  
gaming’s  diverse  audience  seem  implausible —an ask for 
systems that allow multiple culturally -aware versions of a 
game  (e.g., pluralistic and racially -inclusive narrative pro-
gression s, character interactions, etc.). Expectations for 
higher resolution s, modelling,  greater range and depth in 
avatar customization complicate the ability to implement a 
single character  not to mention diverse character types and 
interactions. Meeting these d emands costs money, time, 
know ledge ; however, e ven small  steps forward —those as 
seemingly minute as rendering African -American hair with 
accuracy  [66]—are received  positiv ely [139,140,147] .  
Accuracy  in representation  is imperative.  Termed “color 
blindness”  [19], unawareness of racial -ethnic nuances or  
assumptions that characteristics are universally shared with 
white cultural norms is one aspect of what leads to the dis-
crepancy between what players of color want and what in-
dustry produces [26,109] . Identity is comprised of multiple , 
nuanced  facets (e.g. hair textures , facial structure s, body 
types, voice  timbre, movement  styles , context ual reactivity , 
roles,  values,  behaviors , etc. ) [10,14,45,46,75,88,141] . Em-
phasis o n these facets is always contextual  and cultural in 
origin ; how and where faces communicate emotion s, con-
vey nonverbal “accents”, how bodies move  all show cultur-
al differences  [8,39,40,62,75,  76,123,136] —differences  that 
are perceptible to infants  [70]. For example, e motion al ex-
pressivity is communicated more around the  eyes in Japan  
where the U SA focus es around the mouth  [161] . Represent-
ing a character from a culture in which emotional subduc-
tion is the norm  not only places emphasi s on eye dimen-
sions in facial representation, it is necessary to authentically  
and accurately  convey emotion  [161] . Unawareness  of these 
nuances  and complexities  leads to unintentional stereotypes  
(e.g., high-tech blackface ) and miscommunications .  
Methodological Challenge s:  
Current scientific literature on digital games lacks accurate 
data on how non-White players  experience the current state 
of representation. For example, a  2015 survey by Pew [42] 
showed that only 9 -10% of American s felt minorities were 
portrayed poorly  in digital games . The exact composition of 
these results was unclear ( are these 10%  simply representa-
tive of the 12.6 % of African Americans in the USA? ). 
However, there are two major reasons  we think this number 
is underinflated : first, the grim  status of non-White  repre-
sentation  in digital games, as shown ; second, because 
methods for ga thering accurate data from people of color  
often lack s sensitivity in their cross -cultural methods  
[5,16,25,27,41,45,58,66,67,78,96,97,99,100,123] .  
Norms are difficult to accurately study ; understanding them 
while eliciting experiential reports from perspectives within 
those very norms even more -so. Experiential divi des (like 
those that allow people of color to notice a White actor  voicing a non -White character whereas White players are 
oblivious ) rel y on otherwise “invisible” biases, expecta-
tions, and assumptions —on normative and non -normative 
sides alike. C ombining Social Identity Theory  (SIT) , Identi-
ty-Based Motivation theory  (IBM) , and Critical Race Theo-
ry (CRT) , however,  offers a highly reliable  and validated  
framework for making visible experiential differences 
across racial -ethnic lines  [28,30,46,89,112,114,150] .  
In brief, SIT and IBM  frame identities  as social constructs . 
These constructs are  defined, understood, and internalized 
by one’s cultur al and historical context s at the  intersection 
of a person’s  perception s, experiences, and expectations 
[4,75,113,115,142 –144]. These constructs or  “identity -
schemas”  develop in relation to  their context across experi-
ences and age, are achieved , modified,  and fail multiple 
times across a life (e.g., [1,62,82,124] ). People develop 
multiple identit y-schemas  to achieve survival and maximize 
success  across contexts  without losing self -coherency  (e.g., 
they behave and think differently at work vs. at home, or 
with famil y vs. with strangers)  [1,40,75,112,115,125] . 
Identity -schemas are cued by contexts [52,112,113,144] . 
The context s established by current scientific methods (fo-
cus groups, survey design , playtesting) are an extension of 
many of the same norms prevalent th roughout White -
European and American culture s [2,100,148] ; epistemolog-
ically, these scientific practice s arise from similar ideolo-
gies and material conditions . Therefore,  the context of sci-
entific research can prime identity -schema s that align with 
survival and success in White -American  contexts . Given 
that racial -ethnic identities often arise from contexts differ-
ent than  American  norm s, the schema  primed during stand-
ardized study is not necessari ly a racialized -ethnic one  
[31,89,112,114,124] . This priming effect is  a confound  if 
gather ing data on an individual’s racialized -ethnic experi-
ences —as it is with gender biases [74].  
Thus, w hy might so small a proportion  of people report 
poor representation of minorities in digital games while 
current  data suggests otherwise ? Because normatively  
speaking  the current state of gaming  is no “poorer” a repre-
sentation  of minorities  than one learns to expect  from 
American media , American context s. Underrepresentation 
is normal (ized). Psychological disengagement and learned 
neutrality are proven coping mechanisms for people  of col-
or coping  under White norms  [8,50,71,81,94,136] . Togeth-
er, norms lending themselves to color blindness  can leave a 
lack of diversity  unseen by White Americans  who do not 
exper ience discrimination  while  Americans  of color  find it  
unremarkable —“how things are”  [24]. Using IBM, SIT, 
and CRT  to inform our study’s design and counteract bias-
es, we gauge d the experiences , perceptions, and beliefs  of 
players from their ethnicity -centric identity -schema s.  
GATHERING THE DATA  
Survey Design  
Where racial -/ethnicity -centered questions are concerned,  
best practices dictate direct questions [6]. To better inform 
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 3which questions to ask, how to ask them, and control for 
order effects , we used an iterative survey design with local 
players of color, critical race theor y, validated identity and 
experience priming techniques from  Ident ity-Based Motiva-
tion theory  [1,112,114] , Racial -Ethnic Identity measures  
[28,30,39,57,124,160] , and  standard guidelines for experi-
ential -focusing techniques  [16,51,120,122,123,162]  (e.g., 
answers for some sections asked  participants to recall 
memories of  times and place s when they felt particularly 
understood and could relate to those around them) . We 
prim ed ethnicity -centered  player experie nces without lead-
ing responses  and used  multiple phrasing s of questions to 
assess responses  across  several  axes (beliefs/opinions, per-
ceptions, experi ences).  We presented  six ordered  themes : 
(i) Personal Identity Mea sures : We collected s tandard de-
mographic information ( e.g., gender , age, household in-
come , etc. ) and provided  open -ended questions about an-
cestry, heritage, and self -described identity. The latter ques-
tions were constructed to prime reflection about partic i-
pants’ self -identified race and/or ethnicity  schemas . 
(ii) Identity Centrality : We asked questions about the val ue 
of participants’ race, ethnicity , and ancestry . Phrasing s were  
adapted  from racial -identity  measures an d IBM question-
naires on race-ethnicity . We measured  centrality of re-
spondents’ race -ethnicity  to their  identity and if they felt 
they had multiple identities. Participants were asked to de-
scribe the identity they use when playing digital games  and 
if racial identity affects how t hey experience games . 
(iii) Gaming Preferences and Habits : Participants were 
asked if they played digital games regularly. If not, ques-
tions were asked about why (multiple choice and open -
ended). If yes , habits measures ( e.g., platforms, genres of 
choice, play time per week) were collected along with  the 
Digital Games Motivation Scale (DGMS)  [56].  
(iv) Basic Needs and Norm Adaptability : After  priming  
reflect ion on their racial /ethnic background , participants  
answer ed questions about character creation choices ( e.g., 
skin tone, features for identification , preferences,  feeling 
when  playing characters of other  races) . They were asked  
whether current options were sufficient to represent their 
racial -ethnic identity , about choices in character design , and 
what would be necessary to accurately represent them.   
(v) Emotional and Contextual Responsiveness : We asked  
how players felt about the current state of diversity and its 
effects  on their gaming hab its. Experiences with stereotypes 
(e.g., frequency of occurrence, effects on  game choices), of 
diversi ty in gaming and industry, and perceptions of  the 
racial -ethnic diversity’s current state  was questioned .   
(vi) Expressions to Developers and Industry:  We asked  
multiple, optional open -ended questions  to communicate 
additional experiences and perspectives. This was to collect 
general themes, provide a platform for open communication 
to researchers, and  in case our instruments had overlooked 
relevant data. Participants were asked how they felt their community and Americans  would respond to gr eater in-
game diversity, if they had personal experiences to relate,  
and if they wished  to convey anything  to game developers. 
A final open field was included for additi onal comments.  
Procedure  
In our final survey, we asked 92 questions (including the 45 
DGMS items) consisting of multiple -choice, choose -all-
that-apply, 7 -point Likert scales (“1=strongly disagree” to 
“7=strongly agree”), and 12 open -ended questions (e.g. , 
“Can you describe the identity from which you experience 
most digital games ?”). Design was iterative, beginning with 
10 semi -structured interviews with players of color  who 
share a positive and trusting rapport  with the lea d research-
er [52,121]  and then pilot-tested  the survey  with 5 demo-
graphically diverse individuals .  
Participants were gathered through Amazon  Mechanical-
Turk (MTurk), a validated and reliable platform [72,86]  that 
offer s a range  of Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs) (e.g., 
marketing  questio nnaires or research studies) to paid work-
ers. In line with best practices, w e measured time spent per 
questionnaire to ensure that particip ants were attentive de-
spite the online setting  [72,86] .  
Ethical approv al was obtained from the University of Sas-
katchewan Behavioural Research Ethics Board  and partici-
pants were asked to provide  informed consent. To comply 
with ethical gui delines,  the HIT was only made available to 
workers in the USA who were older than 18. Additionally, 
only workers with an approval rate above 90% were offered 
the HI T as a means of quality control . Participants received 
$3.00USD com pensation for completion  of the 20-min sur-
vey. They  were made aware their identities would remain 
confidential and that no deception  was involved . Data was 
collected over one day  and resulted in 286 total responses .  
Data Analyses  
We conducted both quantitative and qualitative analyses on 
the data gathered from our survey, as well as between - and 
within -group analyses per best practices for studies on ra-
cial-ethnic groups , perceptions, and experiences [30,124] . 
Quantitative Data  
Analysis  was conducted  in SPSS 24.0 (IBM, 2017). We 
used non -parametric tests on both the Likert scale and 
check -all-that-apply data, as described in the results section .  
Qualitative Data  
Thematic and Semantic analysis proceeded  as standard 
[21,22]  with minor modification . All deviations are noted 
below.  Respondent answers were imported into NVivo 11 
(QSR, 2017) . A reflexivity journal was kept in all phases of 
analysis to track codes, themes, and monitor analyst biases 
from familiarity with the data.  
Approach I  (inductive, grounded) : To reduce  analyst bias es, 
prevent some  forcing of data to fit predefined racial expec-
tations and reduce interpreter  biases, and to analyze possi-
ble differences between themes that emerged for each ques-
tion, p articipant order was randomized,  and each open -
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 4ended question analyzed (Phases 1 -5) independent of all 
other questions and participant data.  
Approach II  (inductiv e): A second round (P hases 1 -5) was 
conducted  several days after Approach I  while  bracketing 
previous interpretations of the data  and themes  [16,52] . 
Analysis was conducted per participant , taking into consid-
eration  the sum of  their responses (including quantitative 
responses ), for three primary reasons: to (post -hoc) evaluate 
the fit and reliability of emergent themes from  approach  I; 
to set responses  back into their “living context ” (as expres-
sions interpreted from a person’s  perceptions, beliefs, and 
experiences unfolding over the survey),  thus allowing th e 
analyst a more cons istent and accurate frame through which 
to interpret responses [52]; to permit new themes to emerge 
when the data was ana lyzed within the  context o f the partic-
ipant.  Afterward, themes from approaches I and II were 
compared. Differences in coding prior itized Approach II.  
Approach III  (deductive) : Occasionally, p articipants rec-
orded  experiences from earlier  questions later in the survey 
(e.g. greater detail about  their subjective identification was 
expressed  in “anecdotes” or “community responses to 
greater diversity”).  Analysis here (Phases 3 -6) was con-
ducted  deductively , across the study , for previously identi-
fied themes . This took place predominantl y for themes and 
sub-themes of “Self -Identification ,” “Experiences of Dis-
crimination ,” and “Gaming Motivation.”  
Operationalization,  themes, subthemes, and  coding struc-
ture are discussed in the results.  After all phases of anal-
yses, theme  and code validity  was tested through construct 
correlation with  word cluster s. High theme and word cluster 
correlation was achieved for related themes (>0.6) with low 
correlation between unrelated themes ( <0.2). Code  and 
themes were exported in to binary matrices for each p artici-
pant from NV ivo for quantitative analysis in SPSS.  
Racial Identities and Identification of Participants  
As our research involves differential analysis of responses 
based on race -ethnicity, grouping participants was neces-
sary. Data from the  check -all that apply Racial Category 
question : “How are you formally identified in terms of 
race/ethnicity? ”, was combined  with t wo open -field ques-
tions: “ Please describe who you are (your identity) in twen-
ty words or less ,” at the beginning of the survey , and, “ If 
you think of yourself in terms of heritage, ancestry, family, 
or community, how would you describe your ethnicity? 
(e.g., Traditionally practicing Mohawk, 3rd Generation 
Muslim Pakistani, Scottish -Irish American, etc.) ” at the end 
of the demogra phic questionnaire. Qualitative self -
identifications were coded for these questions and then 
compared to the standardized racial category responses.  
If subjective racial -ethnic categorization conflicted with a 
participants’ racial category  response , their subjective iden-
tification was given priority (e.g., they checked “White” but 
identified “I am light skinned but identify as black, African 
American”) . 17 multi -racial respondents (n=23) explicitly 
identified with a single racial category at exclusion or d is-missal of the other , as did 6 of the “Prefer Not to Answer” 
(n=8) . Only 8 participants (2  White Hispanic , 1 Asian -
Caucasian, 2 Asian Hispanic, 1 Asian African American ) 
identified as “multi -racial ” without definite preference for a 
racial -identifier , or remained unidentifiable  (2). Due to very 
low sample size if these eight participants were categorized 
separately, and great variation between their reported expe-
riences when grouped , we excluded this small subsample as 
well as the 1 Native American partici pant from the study.  
After exclusionary criteria was applied, the sample ( n=277) 
was grouped into  four conceptual racial -identifying groups: 
White ( n=81, 29.2%), Asian ( n=75, 27. 1%), Black ( n=75, 
27.1%), and Hispanic ( n=46 16.6%).  These racial groupings  
represent a heuristic “more similar than not” grouping de-
termined by the purposes and results of this study; they do 
not reflect some essential or reductive experience of any 
race, e thnicity, ancestry, or heritage.  We therefore encour-
age criticality when generalizing  these  results along racial-
ized lines , keeping in mind that racial and ethnic attributes 
are only one multiplex component of a larger intersectional 
picture. Because identity is fluid, socially -dependent in its 
construction, and contextually -determined in its expression, 
it is not inconceivable to us that most participants subjec-
tively self -identified in terms of White, Black, Hispanic, or 
Asian within this study —particularly given racial category 
norms in  both the US and in digital games . The racial 
groupings here show higher variance in Asian and Hispanic 
samples  than White and Black groups, consistent with cen-
sus data and previous literature . Of our 277 participants  
(mean age= 32, SD=9.4 ), 98 were female, and 3 were non -
binary or prefer not to disclose ; 266 played digital games, 
and the  vast majority (254) played at least weekly.  
RESULTS  
Perceptions and Beliefs  
First, we establish whether players of color perceive the 
lack of  racial  diversity in digital game characters . We then 
report on  negati ve stereotypes  players  have encountered 
and their racialized play experiences. We then question  the 
perceived importance of racial diversity in games.  
Perceptions of Racial Diversity  
To understand the perception  of racial diversity, we asked 
several  question s; see Table 1 for means, standard devia-
tions, and results of the statistical tests.  
White players agreed that the digital games industry repre-
sents enough racial or ethnic diversity significantly more 
than Black or Hispanic players , who were below neutral in 
their level of agreement . However, there was no differe nce 
in agreement with the statement that the games industry is 
able to  represent enough racial diversity , in which  agree-
ment was above neutral for each group.  
Further, w e asked participan ts to check all answers that 
applied for, within digital games themselves, how do you 
feel diversity is treated ? There were only 8/277 (3%) of 
players who responded with not at all , 47/277 (17%) who 
responded with not enough , 93 (34%) who responded with 
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 5superficially , 139 (50%) who responded with it’s getting 
better , 45 (16%) who responded with already very diverse , 
and 12 (4%) who responded with there is too much diversi-
ty. Chi -squared tests revealed no differences in any answer 
based on race (all p>0.1) , except for  not at all  (23=9.8, 
p=.020), which 6 Black players , but only 1 White player , 1 
Asian player, and no Hispanic players  chose . 
Table 1. Means (SD) for agreement (1=strongly disagree , 
7=strongly agree , 4=neutral ). Signific ance is calculated with 
the Kruskal -Wallis Test for multiple independent samples.   
 
White players, Asian players, and Hispanic players disa-
greed that they experience digital games differently than 
people from other races or ethnicities , whereas Black play-
ers felt neutral; White and Hispanic players agreed signifi-
cantly less than Black players.    
In terms of characters of color, players of color agreed that 
most human characters I encounter in digital games are 
white , whereas White players were neutral in their agree-
ment; White players agreed significantly less than Black or 
Hispanic players. However, White players did agree signif-
icantly more that I often encounter characters in digital 
games that accurately represent my race or ethnicity  than 
Black, As ian, or Hispanic players, who were all below the 
neutral point on the scale. Furthermore, all groups agreed 
that most non -White characters are stereotypes , with Black 
players agreeing significantly more than White players. 
This agreement was significant fo r all groups as shown by 
one-sample Wilcoxon Signed Ranks tests (all p<.001).  
Negative Stereotypes Encountered  
We asked participants whether they encountered racial 
stereotypes in digital games  with the options of never , 10%, 
30%, 50%, 70%, 90%, and almos t always . An Independent -
Samples Kruskal Wallis test showed that participants re-
sponded differently depending on their racial group 
(KW 3=9.52, p=.023).  Pairwise comparisons showed that 
Black players reported a higher frequency of encountering 
racial stereo types than White players.  
We further asked  do stereotypes affect what digital games 
you play? (see Figure 1). Chi-squared tests for each answer 
showed significant racial differences in the answers for no (23=10.4, p=.015) and sometimes  (23=8.6, p=.035), but 
not I don’t know  (23=1.5, p=.691) or yes (23=3.1, p=.370). 
As Figure 1 shows, Black players were less likely to answer 
no and more likely to answer sometimes .  
 
Figure 1. Proportions of answers for check -one question s. 
Themes related  to discrimination  and motivation to game 
were analyzed . We operationalized “e xperiences of dis-
crimination” as descriptions of negative affect  directly as-
sociated with feeling of being unjustly silenced, unwel-
come d, minimized, stigmatized, mis - or un- represented due 
to unchangeable attributes of self ( e.g., skin color, gender, 
race) . To gather data on first -hand, systemic experiences 
and filter  speculative discrimination  (e.g., “I know a lot of 
characters are stereotypes” ) we applied inclusionary crite-
ria: (i) a minimum of two  separate examples of personally -
experienced discrimination ; (ii) a personal experience of 
discrimination framed as  a common systemic occurrence ; 
or (iii) at least  two perce ived instances in which someone 
close to the participant experienc ed discrimination . 
116 (41.9%) participants described experiences of discrimi-
nation , which  were  often associated with a source. 44 cases 
(37.9% of total discrimination themes) associated other 
players, almost exclusively in the form of racial epithets:  
When I play online multiplayer, since I’m obviously not white, I am 
called a nigger when I play Halo Master Chief Addition. This is the 
worst experience and it makes me feel not part of my f avorite 
community.  
96 cases (82. 8% of all discrimination coded)  associated 
development and/or industry as its source. Subthemes here 
referred to explicit racism (stereotypical game characters, 
demeaning narratives, and misrepresentations) and institu-
tional  racism (tokenism, absence of representation, etc.):  
The only thing worse than invisibility is tokenism. I don't think any-
one is asking for Dunkirk: The African Regiment, just normal black 
people with a range o f personalities and backgrounds . 
I've never pl ayed a game with a female latina lead. Not one. I can't 
even name one game that features a latina sidekick. I'm sure 
there are some, but it's such a fringe thing that I've never been 
able to experience a fantasy world through the actions of some-
one like me . Maybe this is me just being emotional but, it makes 
me sad. The few instances of latina characters I've heard of tend 
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 6to fall under the sexy latina trope, it's like we're not seen as people 
just as hot play things or something . 
A subtheme of institutiona l racism expressed discrimination 
through technical aspects in gaming (environmental lighting 
or costume design not balanced for non -White characters, 
White voice actors playing characters of color, etc.):  
I choose a lighter skin tone because I am a darker  Asian  so it 
causes problems with the game. When I choose my skin color, all 
the faces makes it look like they ’re African American . 
A lot of the hair, clothing, and other options seem to look bette r on 
avatars with lighter skin.  
30.9% of White (1/3 of whic h referred to gender or heter-
onormativity),  44.0% of Asian, 45.3% of Black, and 52.2% 
of Hispanic players detailed  experienc es of  discrimination.  
Table 2. Means (SD) for agreement (1=strongly disagree, 
7=strongly agree, 4=neutral). Significance is calculated with 
the Kruskal -Wallis Test for multiple independent samples.   
 
Importance of Racial Representation  
All groups agreed that it is important to me that  digital 
gaming include experiences built around my race, ethnicity, 
heritage,  or ancestry ; Black players agreed significantly 
more than White players . Players of color agreed that play-
ing games in which my race and/or ethnicity is accurately 
represented improves my gaming experience ; there were no 
significant differences in the str ength of agreement based 
on group , but one-sample Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests 
showed that Black and Asian players significantly agreed 
(pB=.002, p A=.020, p), whereas White and Hispanic players 
did not (p W=.786, p H=.457).   
We further asked if players prefer  to play a character that 
accurately represents my racial or ethnic identity . Chi-
squared tests for answer show significant racial differences 
in the answers for yes (23=15.1, p=. 002) and I don’t know  
(23=10.1, p=. 018), but not no (23=1.5, p=. 690) and prefer 
not to answer  (22=1.6, p=. 449). As Figure 1 shows, a 
greater proportion of White and Black players would prefer 
to play a character that represented their race ; a smaller 
proportion  of White and Black players did not know.  
To evaluate experience  of norms against  behavior  and pref-
erence we asked, How do you feel about playing a white 
character in a video game? (check -all; see Table 3). Most 
players agreed pla ying White characters “has never been a 
problem” or “I am used to it.” Other responses qualify ex-
perience of this norm, indicating positive, negative, or neu-
tral effect (see Table 3).  White players exceeded players of 
color across positive qualifiers and w ere closer in propor-tion to the norm than non -White groups; the majority of 
non-White players did not qualify their experience of the 
norm, positively or negatively.  
Table 3. Reponses percentage visually divided by  norm.  
 
Perceived Barriers to Increased Diversity  
Players were asked  about the ir identity -schemas  and what 
they perceived were barriers to increasing diversity . 
We asked players  about having multiple identities (see Fig-
ure 1).  Chi-squared tests show significant ra cial differences 
in answers for yes (23=11.5, p=.00 6) and  no (23=17.8, 
p<.001 ), but not  I don’t know  (23=1.8, p=.624), with  fewer 
White players  reporting yes and more reporting no  (Fig. 1) .  
We asked the open -ended question, Can you describe the 
identity from which you experience most digital games?  
40.4% of players ( n=112) employed “ Multiple Identities ” in 
daily life. These  were often accompanied by contextual or 
affective descriptions:  
When I'm at work, I tend to identify as White (although I a dmit be-
ing multi -racial when asked) because it is generally more ac-
ceptable to behave as if I were white. At home, I identify as multi -
racial and don't feel the need to change my appearance at home 
(in the workplace, I consistently have my hair pulled back  or 
tamed, but at home I am comfortable wearing an afro).  
33.9% of players described their identity as “ singular ” 
(n=94) (e.g. “I only have one identity,” “I play from the 
stand point of the only identity I consider myself to be in all 
situations.”) . 78.7%  of singular themes fell under a sub -
theme of “I am always me no matter the situation” ( n=74).  
All other  responses  were coded as “ No answer/misanswer ” 
(n=52; 18. 8%) (e.g. “N/A”, “I like elves and fantasy charac-
ters”) or “I don’t think about it/I’m unsure”  (n=19; 6. 9%) 
(e.g., “I guess I don't really think ab out identity at all in this 
way,”  “I’m unsure, it’s hard to answer”).  More players of 
color employed “multiple” identity -schemas.  
We asked players How do you feel the community you iden-
tify with (in real  life) would respond to greater diversity in 
digital games?  and How do you feel the American popula-
tion in general would respond to greater diversity in digital 
games?  All responses contained themes of reaction : 
Positive Reaction  (e.g., “Positively and hap pily and joyfully 
because it would make the experience more interesting and 
different. Tired of the brown h aired white guy saving the 
day.”); Negative Reaction  (e.g., “most likely be offended 
like som ething is being taken from them.”) ; Apathet-
ic/Neutral Reaction  (e.g., “I feel my community would be 
fine with  it but not very much effected.”) , coded from con-
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 7tent thematically unified by indifference (e.g. , "they would 
be open ," "won't mind  or notice ," or "would not care "). 
Content was given a qualifying sub-theme  to convey pro-
portion: Entirely , when themed stances were singular (e.g. , 
“I think everyone would be happier for it, even if they aren't 
gamers.”); Mostly , which encompassed a “more -than-half” 
proportion (e.g. , “I think they would approve for the most 
part, but I'm sure a select few that would complain.”); and 
Some , indicating a small proportion (e.g. , “Some would see 
it as a  positive step forward”) . 
Slightly higher frequencies of positive responses were 
found for players  of color . “Fear of greater diversity at a 
cost,” a minor sub -theme associated almost exclusively 
with a pathic and negative responses , contained racially di-
vided themes : while some White players feared diversity at 
the cost of game mechanics, some players  of color  feared 
diversity at a cost of further stereotyping  or misrepresenta-
tion. Fears surrounding  diversity were  less frequent than 
positive themes , that "gaming would  benefit from more 
diverse perspectives/characters/choices".   
DISCUSSION  
Players of al l races -ethnicities want greater  diversity and 
feel the gaming industry is capable of meeting this demand  
but currently is not . We discuss the challenges , opportuni-
ties, and implications  of increasing racial diversity  on play-
er experiences,  and provide developers with advice for its 
successful implement ation . 
Why Experiences Must Be Distinguished from Norms  
Our results show  much  higher , qualified  rates of players 
feeling that minorities are represented poorly than Pew’s 
2015 study [42]—even among exclusively White players 
(44-52% of players of color  and 31% of White players  cited 
experiences of discrimination). The majority of players —
across racial groups —felt that most game characters were 
White and most non -White characters are stereotypes.  
We attribute our higher rates to effective implementation of 
IBM , CRT, REI,  racial -priming techniques , and close rela-
tionships with people /gamers of color . We demonstra te how 
a study’s context can cue responses from a racial -ethnic 
schema , allow ing us to overcom e possible  learned d etach-
ment from players of color accustomed to misrepresenta-
tion, discrimination, and effects of multiple -identity sche-
mas—as well as  norms  that can blind White players  to their 
own raci alized experiences . Accurate data -gathering re-
quires racially -sensitive techniques to render norms  visible, 
and then  to elicit experiences  beyond normalized responses .  
Distinguish ing experiences from perceptio ns and beliefs  is 
fundamental to  data-gathering  when norms are involved  
[30,32,52,112,113,121] , as is phrasing and prompting . For example, asking people about their  community prompts  
direct  experiential data; asking players to account for 
“Americans ” prompts belief s. When respondents speculate d 
about “America’s response”, they were less certain (fewer 
“entirely” and more “some” responses) than when relating 
their own community’s response.  Here,  the presence of a 
negative “vocal minority” is felt and perceived , but exag-
gerated : across all communi ties the expected response is  
largely  entirely  positive. In-group favorability , misattribu-
tion errors  and over -estimation biases exist [23,25] ; howev-
er, answers speaking to di rect experiences are more likely  
accurate than opinions based on fear or internalized expec-
tation s—particularly when  contending with norms,  privi-
lege, or learned detachment  [6,16,120,122,123] .  
The pervasiveness of norm s may render them invisible 
[18,19,36,49,64,90] , but imperceptibility does not mean that 
these norms go  unexperienced . Though some players (most-
ly White) felt  that greater diversity was unnecessary and 
might detract from “more important  things like  game me-
chanics, ” the majority of players did not feel similarly . 
Racial -Ethnic Experiences: Far from Black and  White  
Consistent  with literature on norms and privilege , we show 
that race and ethnicity inform the perception of diversity —
in degree , quality , and source . Unsurprisingly, players of 
color are more acutely aware of the racism and discrimina-
tion in digital  games  and perceive a greater need for diversi-
ty than their White cohort. Players of color experience  ra-
cial-ethnic discrimination more than other players —
especially in its less explicit forms of systemic and indus-
try-based racism —and employ more coping st rategies like 
multiple -identity schemas while gaming . Experience ex-
ceeding perception is not only why Black players differ 
from White players (and from some Asian and Hispanic 
players) across measures, it is also why we see negative 
experiences compounded across intersectional lines ( Black 
women  reported more experiences of discrimination than 
any other demographic).  
Not all players of color perceive or experience discrimina-
tion similarly. Racial -ethnic differences are complex, nu-
anced, subjective, and furt her complicated by other identity 
measures (gender, class, darkness of skin, ability, family 
structure, etc.)  [32,95] . And while we lack space to analyze 
these important interse ctional effects  in this paper , we show 
the strongest divides on racial -ethnic representation fall 
between White players and players of c olor.  
Why Would Players Want Diversity?  
Where current norms in gaming undermine the desires and 
experiences of players of color, they also underserve White 
players.  White -grouped participants equivocate on whether 
meaningful representation of race -ethnicit y in games bene-
fits their experiences, whereas  they feel  positive about p lay-
ing White characters and feel  current character options ac-
curately  represent  their racial -ethnicities. Participants in the 
White group want novelty , role-play and fantasy,  in highe r 
proportion than players of color . Results like these suggest 
more than a privilege of immersion: they show that White 
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 8players have a luxury of racial -/ethnic -representation —
enough to  desire the novel experiences  and differential  rep-
resentation  that diversity bring s. 
Thus, while players across groups perceive more stereotyp-
ing and need for diversity in gaming than not, we cleave an 
important distinction: White players perceive lower rates of 
negative racial -ethnic representation and game more from a 
sense of core self because they do not experience its direct 
racial -ethnic effects. Their perception relies on  what they 
have been taught  (or not taught) about stereotypes. This is 
markedly different from how players of color directly expe-
rienc e the cogniti ve and affective impacts of stereotypes. It 
is more difficult for White participants  to perceive poor 
representation because they feel accurately racially -
represented , they must learn to identif y discrimination as a 
norm , and  they must consciously intend  to perceive these 
norms  [18,90] . Considering that game dev elopers are pre-
dominantly White [5,133,150] , the problems of misrepre-
sentation derive from both  less perception  of discrimination 
and lower personal stakes in its correction .   
Players discussed the novelty that diversity  can bring to 
gaming , through  telling untold stories and representations 
of characters and cultures  currently absent in games:  
Get genu ine honest stories and experiences from diverse people 
and you'll never run out of ideas. It's a literal goldmine of ideas 
when you look for interesting stories from different races and eth-
nicity and genders whatever. There's enough brown haired white  
guys  with guns saving the day.  
Racial -ethnic  diversity done accurately provides opportuni-
ties to  tell the same stories from different perspectives, de-
pict new interactions, and reinvigorat e tired tropes.  Novelty 
is wanted, and it sells. Diversity means variati on in players’ 
interactions: with each another, with tasks, and in game 
worlds . Inclusion of r acial and ethnic diversity means more 
players with different  playstyles , skills,  and in -game moti-
vations —which means a richer gaming experience.   
Representation  Matters  
People who game willingly represent themselves as fiction-
al characters. However, p layers of color agree d that experi-
ences built around their race -ethnicity are more important  
than not , and are suggested to benefit more from  accurate 
representation s of their race -ethnicity . Players of color gen-
erally agree d that accurate representation improves their 
experience  and want to game as themselves, freed from eve-
ryday social restrictions and stigmas:  
My gaming identity comes closest to the identity I use when asso-
ciating with close friends and family in that it is more open and 
unguarded compared to my professional work identity. Because 
digital gaming offers a degree of anonymity, I feel more free to 
express myself and not have to worry about following co nventions 
or social norms.  
These results are in line with our understanding of  the ef-
fects of representation  in games. I dentifying with a virtual 
representation shows  benefits to engagement, immersion , 
and enjoyment [15,146,149] , to performance  [12,151] , can 
increase players’ sense of agency  [12], increase gaming’s  
cognitive benefits  [54,55] , and decrease negative a ffect [12,36,158,159] . Lower identification , and barriers to en-
gagement means loss es to many of gaming’s benefits : lower 
emotional self -regulation  [54], low er benefit from quality 
socializing  [34,38,151] , increased aggression  [159] , and 
less mood repair  [129] . As p layers of color were less likely 
to cite gaming from this “core” or “freed” identity -schema, 
the relationships between feeling accurately and positively 
represented helps support and explain some of the differ-
ences  we see in literature between players, ethnicity, and 
received health benefits from gaming.  
Gaming’s potential benefits, potential interventions, and 
reinforcement of racism and discrimination are, here, tied to 
the same factor: representation. Recalling t he psycho -social 
effects of unacknowledged racism cited earlier 
[49,63,89,111,126,130,135,145] , representation can be a 
crucial factor in whether digital games reverse or reinforce 
unnecessarily oppressive systems. And while we do not 
suggest digital representations are the sole cause  of the 
many issues discussed, representation is an aspect of gam-
ing that affects entwined sociocultural, intrapersonal, and 
developmental systems. Lack of diversity in games means  
reinf orcing negative biases, which negatively affects all 
players [13,37,58,65,134,151,159]  and has broad  social 
repercussi ons. All experiences happen in a context , and the 
context of current gaming norms as expressed by many 
players of color is system ic discrimination . Players of color 
experience the absence of meaningful racial -ethnic repre-
sentation as negative representatio n. Thus, there is little 
room for neutrality in the digital creation of experiences.  
The majority of participants “are used to” playing White 
characters. While White players feel positively about this, 
players of color feel neither positively nor negative ly about 
this standard. Their most common response, “it doesn’t 
bother me,” indicates the same learned coping mechanisms 
(acceptance and detachment) seen under systemic racism 
[24]. Players of color may not be deterred by stereotypi cal 
representations, or a lack of representation altogether, be-
cause one get s “used to it.” However, forcing players of 
color to cope is unnecessary in digital gaming; White play-
ers already feel accurately represented in terms of race -
ethnicity . If accurat e racial representation is widely seen as  
achieva ble for White players , it stands to reason that most 
players see the digital gam ing industry as capable of repre-
senting other races/ethnicities.  
Are Players Feeling I mmersed?  
Research  identifies multiple conditions for obtaining player 
experiences of immersion: from suspension of disbelief, 
connection to personal experiences, and affection for (virtu-
al) characters [80,116]  to intrapersonal dynamics like atti-
tude, observational learning, emotional arousal, self -
efficacy, subjective norms, and intrinsic motivation  
[13,67,80,116 ,146,152,155] . Although o ur survey questions 
concerned racial -ethnic representation s and human charac-
ters, participant s localized sources of discrimination  across 
almost every  facet of digital gaming:  from virtual black-
face, colorism,  and mispronunciati on of non -Anglo names  
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 9to environmental lighting , performance handicaps , player 
interactions,  and negative responses to  non-White narra-
tives , contexts , and digital actors . Players cited  these expe-
riences as barriers to the ir self-described  “sense  of immer-
sion,” sustained engagement, and express ed (as in litera-
ture) that gaming’s current norms have negative  effects on 
many of the experiential constructs  compri sing immersi on. 
The more antecedents a construct has  the more likely a 
player of colo r is to experience at least one barrier to  that 
construct  during an instance of play . Thus,  while p layers of 
color vary in the source s, intensit ies, and qualities  of expe-
rienced discrimination,  players of color are more likely to 
experience  at least one  barrier t o constructs that require  
many antecedent  and sustained constructs,  such as  immer-
sion.  Future studies will need to  quantify the effect  that race 
and ethnicit y have on presence, engagement, engrossment, 
and immersion ; however,  we see , in our results and the the-
oretical connections made here , experiential constructs like  
immersion are a privilege more available to White players 
than players of color.  
Advice for Industry  
Despite poor racial -ethnic representation, digital gaming is 
overt aking  other forms of entertainment media.  Clearly, 
players are not opposed to identifying with charac ters of 
other races /ethnicities  [131,138] . How players are willing to 
represent should not overcast how they want and deserve to 
represent. Audience demand for greater diversity is high, 
likely backlash is low, and diversity’s benefits immense. 
With racial -ethnic representation already achieved for 
White players, more  valued by players of color, beneficial 
to all player  experiences  and gameplay,  and profitable,  
game companies have much to gain and little to lose by 
diversifying.  The privilege of immersion Whi te players 
enjoy affords room to deviate from White norms when de-
livering what most  players want:  representation, novelty, 
equal access to gamer experiences and benefits, choice  in 
identification : diversity.   
Those who are represented should be the ones to decide 
what constitutes accurate representation. Players from our 
survey  express that d iversity must be a deliberate choice; it 
cannot be tacked -on if the intention is to avoid high tech 
blackface and other signals to non -White players  that they 
are after -thought s or do not belong [73,79,137,138] . Players 
of color who feared diversification did so out o f past expe-
riences , where that greater diversity led to more stereotyp-
ing, which is why  players request greater  industry  engage-
ment  in and research on racial -ethnic identities (facial and 
physical features, attire, speech and movement patterns, 
norms, etc. ). Hiring people of the same race -ethnicity repre-
sented in -game, establishing spaces for them to engage 
openly from their racialized -ethnic schemas, and allowing 
their experiences to inform development —from  pre-
production to playtesting  and evaluation —is a well-advised, 
parsimonious first step:  
I think the issue stems from there being a lack of black game de-
velopers. I would like to see more scholarships and recruitment that bring in black developers, because who knows how to ap-
peal to the black demographic  better than someone who identi-
fies as black? Please try to involve more minorities, even if that 
means you have to actively seek them. It is important that every-
one is represented in video games; it is even more important that 
the people who are represent ed are  accurately represented. T he 
means of doing so are to involve people of diverse ethnic groups.  
Without addressing these issues, digital actors  too easily 
become source s of disengagement.   
LIMITATIONS  AND FUTURE WORK  
Our Hispanic -Latinx  sample size was low and there were 
fewer women than men in our sample.  Further selective  
sampling is ne eded  to accurately reflect  intersectional ef-
fects (e.g., interactions with  gender , socioeconomic class , 
etc.) or to group participants by their more accurate and 
reflective subjective identification . Our regretful lack of 
response from Native American and Indigenous groups 
demonstrates the need for a lternative sampling methods  and 
community engagement  to adequately represent the per-
spectives of these populations . Our sample was almost ex-
clusively active players , risking  bias in loss of data  from 
would -be players turned off  by gaming’s current  norms. 
How individuals characterize themselves, what features are 
important to how they represent their racial identity, an d 
what character features players across  races -ethnicities feel 
are necessary constructs  like engrossment, motivation, and 
immersion are key areas for fu ture study. Several players 
mentioned the importance of narratives and stories c entered 
on non -White ch aracters , the specific requests  of which are 
worth y of future study . Establishing spaces for non -White 
research on racialized experiences is necessary, as are in -
depth interviews for greater specificity on player needs.  
CONCLUSION  
White players appear  expe rientially satisfied  with their ra-
cial-ethnic representation in games,  whereas  players of col-
or are employ ing common strategies to meet their needs  
under unnecessary discrimination. If players game to repre-
sent who they , engage and immerse themselves with greater 
freedom than life outside of gaming allows , it is those who 
face systematic discrimination that have the most to gain 
from changes in digital gaming ’s norms . Our study demon-
strates that White players understand some level of what 
players of color experience and feel they deserve equal op-
portunity to be immersed in games.  Diversity has been 
shown to be wanted by players of all races -ethnicities and 
to benefit pla yers of all races -ethnicities.  If digital gaming 
intends to represent humans then it must do so carefully, as 
it risks harmful negative representations . Accuracy, collab-
oration, and information is thus paramount  to addressing 
these issues . Much more than a  low-risk high -reward indus-
try choice, appropriate racial/ethnic representation and di-
versity is a social and moral demand —with repercussions 
on a host of biopsychosocial facto rs. If we have the re-
sources, talent, technology, information, and creativity to  
create fantastical game  worlds —to allow players to become 
superheroes, celebrities , imaginary creatures , and W hite—
why can we not  allow players of color to be themselves?  
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 10ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
This study would not have been possible w ithout the insight 
and cons ultation  of Jessica Alegria and Vivian Phillips , to 
whom we are grateful . We would like to thank the Alegria , 
Ibarra -Castillo, and Reid -Taypoytat  families. We are in-
debted to the friends and colleagues who lent us their labor 
and trust in the early iterati ons of this study, and to this 
study’s participants . Thanks to SWaGUR for funding.  
REFERENCES  
1. Inna Altschul, Daphna Oyserman, and Deborah 
Bybee. 2006. Racial -Ethnic Identity in Mid -
Adolescence: Content and Change as Predictors of 
Academic Achievement. Child Development  77, 5: 
1155 –1169.  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467 -
8624.2006.00926.x  
2. Warwick An derson. 2002. The cultivation of 
whiteness : science, health, and racial destiny in 
Australia . Melbourne University Press.  
3. Erin Ash. 2016. Priming or Proteus Effect? 
Examining the Effects of Avatar Race on In -Game 
Behavior and Post -Play Aggressive Cogni tion and 
Affect in Video Games. Games and Culture  11, 4: 
422–440. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1555412014568870  
4. Richard D. Ashmore, Kay Deaux, and Tracy 
McLaughlin -Volpe. 2004. An Organizing 
Framework for Collective Identity: Articulation and 
Significance of  Multidimensionality. Psychological 
Bulletin  130, 1: 80 –114. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033 -2909.130.1.80  
5. International Game Developers Association. 2005. 
Game Developer Demographics: An Exploration of 
Workforce Diversity . Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.igda.org/resource/coll
ection/9215B88F -2AA3 -4471 -B44D -
B5D58FF25DC7/IGDA_DeveloperDemographics_
Oct05.pdf  
6. Jordan R. Axt. 2017. The best way to measure 
explicit racial attitudes is to ask about them. Social 
Psychology and Personali ty Science  tbt, tbt: 29. 
Retrieved December 18, 2017 from 
https://osf.io/rbcws/  
7. Waclaw Bak. 2014. Self -Standards and Self -
Discrepancies. A Structural Model of Self -
Knowledge. Current psychology (New Brunswick, 
N.J.)  33, 2: 155 –173. 
https://doi.org/10.10 07/s12144 -013-9203 -4 
8. Michael D. Barnett, Jenna M. Moore, and Aleesa R. 
Harp. 2017. Who we are and how we feel: Self -
discrepancy theory and specific affective states. 111: 
232–237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2017.02.024  
9. Michael D. Barnett and Pale e M. Womack. 2015. 
Fearing, not loving, the reflection: Narcissism, self -esteem, and self -discrepancy theory. 74: 280 –284. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2014.10.032  
10. Martin G. Beaupré and Ursula Hess. 2005. Cross -
Cultural Emotion Recognition among Cana dian 
Ethnic Groups. Journal of Cross -Cultural 
Psychology  36, 3: 355 –370. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022022104273656  
11. Elizabeth Behm -Morawitz. 2017. Examining the 
intersection of race and gender in video game 
advertising. Journal of Marketing Communication s 
23, 3: 220 –239. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13527266.2014.914562  
12. Elizabeth Behm -Morawitz, Joseph Hoffswell, and 
Szu-Wei Chen. 2016. The Virtual Threat Effect: A 
Test of Competing Explanations for the Effects of 
Racial Stereotyping in Video Games on Playe rs’ 
Cognitions. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social 
Networking  19, 5: 308 –313. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2015.0461  
13. Elizabeth Behm -Morawitz, Hillary Pennell, and 
Ashton Gerding Speno. 2016. The effects of virtual 
racial embodiment in a gaming app on reducing 
prejudice. Communication Monographs  83, 3: 396 –
418. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03637751.2015.1128556  
14. Michael D. Berzonsky and Dennis R. Papini. 2015. 
Cognitive Reasoning, Identity Components, and 
Identity Processing Styles. Identity  15, 1: 74 –88. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15283488.2014.989444  
15. Max V. Birk, Cheralyn Atkins, Jason T. Bowey, and 
Regan L. Mandryk. 2016. Fostering Intrinsic 
Motivation through Avatar Identification in Digital 
Games. Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on 
Human Fa ctors in Computing Systems - CHI ’16 : 
2982 –2995. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858062  
16. Michel Bitbol and Claire Petitmengin. 2013. How to 
research lived experience? . Retrieved September 13, 
2017 from https://hal.archives -ouvertes.fr/hal -
01284226/  
17. Tom Boellstorff. Coming of age in Second Life : an 
anthropologist explores the virtually human .  
18. W.E.B. Du Bois. 1903. The souls of black folk.  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13398 -014-0173 -7.2 
19. Eduardo Bonilla -Silva. 2010. Racism without 
racists: color -blind racism and the persistence of 
racial inequality in the United States . Rowman & 
Littlefield Publishers.  
20. Tom Bramwell. 2014. Assassin’s Creed Unity is a 
backward step for progressive games. Eurogamer . 
Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://www.euroga mer.net/articles/2014 -06-12-
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 11assassins -creed -unity -is-a-step-backward -for-
progressive -games  
21. Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using 
thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative 
Research in Psychology  3, 2: 77 –101. 
https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa  
22. Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2016. 
(Mis)conceptualising themes, thematic analysis, 
and other problems with Fugard and Potts’ (2015) 
sample -size tool for thematic analysis. International 
Journal of Social Research Methodology  19, 6: 
739–743. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13645579.2016.1195588  
23. Marilynn B. Brewer. 1979. In -group bias in the 
minimal intergroup situation: A cognitive -
motivational analysis. Psychological Bulletin  86, 2: 
307–324. ht tps://doi.org/10.1037/0033 -
2909.86.2.307  
24. Elizabeth Brondolo, Nisha Brady ver Halen, 
Melissa Pencille, Danielle Beatty, and Richard J. 
Contrada. 2009. Coping with racism: a selective 
review of the literature and a theoretical and 
methodological critique . Journal of Behavioral 
Medicine  32, 1: 64 –88. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10865 -008-9193 -0 
25. Jonathon D. Brown. 1986. Evaluations of Self and 
Others: Self -Enhancement Biases in Social 
Judgments. Social Cognition  4, 4: 353 –376. 
https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.1986.4.4.353  
26. Bryan James Carr. 2015. “Now you’re playing with 
paradigms”: Toward a critical approach to video 
games as interactive media. 75, No Pagination 
Specified. Retrieved May 30, 2017 from 
http://searc h.proquest.com/docview/1526478430/ab
stract/95CDE2F4BA364740PQ/1  
27. Charles S. Carver, John W. Lawrence, and Michael 
F. Scheier. 1999. Self -discrepancies and affect: 
Incorporating the role of feared selves. 25, 7: 783 –
792. Retrieved July 14, 2017 from 
https://www.scopus.com/record/display.uri?eid=2 -
s2.0-
0033247454&origin=inward&txGid=CB5196E98D
A38028BDB65100738814BC.wsnAw8kcdt7IPYL
O0V48gA%3A1  
28. Shannon L. Casey -Cannon, Hardin L. K. Coleman, 
Laura F. Knudtson, and Carmen C. Velazquez. 
2011. Three Ethnic an d Racial Identity Measures: 
Concurrent and Divergent Validity for Diverse 
Adolescents. Identity  11, 1: 64 –91. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15283488.2011.540739  
29. Adrian Chmierlarz. 2015. The Moral and 
Commercial Appeal of Diversity in Video Games. 
The Medium . Retrieved June 30, 2017 from https://medium.com/@adrianchm/the -moral -and-
commercial -appeal -of-diversity -in-video -games -
78fb33693ca2  
30. Kevin Cokley. 2007. Critical issues in the 
measurement of ethnic and racial identity: A 
referendum on the state of the field. Journal of 
Counseling Psychology  54, 3: 224 –234. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022 -0167.54.3.224  
31. Kevin Cokley and Katherine Helm. 2007. The 
Relationship Between African American 
Enculturation and Racial Identity. Journal of 
Multicultural Counseling a nd Development  35, 3: 
142–153. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2161 -
1912.2007.tb00056.x  
32. Kimberle Crenshaw. 1991. Mapping the Margins: 
Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence 
against Women of Color. Stanford Law Review  43, 
6: 1241. https://doi.org/ 10.2307/1229039  
33. Shonte Daniels. 2016. Black Video Game 
Characters Are Still Often Voiced by White Actors 
- Motherboard. Motherboard: Vice . Retrieved 
August 15, 2017 from 
https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/78kv5x/
black -video -game -characters -are-still-often -voiced -
by-white -actors -uncharted -4-nadine -ross 
34. Ansgar E Depping, Regan L Mandryk, Colby 
Johanson, Jason T Bowey, and Shelby C Thomson. 
2016. Trust Me: Social Games are Better than 
Social Icebreakers at Building Trust. Proceedings 
of the 201 6 Annual Symposium on Computer -
Human Interaction in Play - CHI PLAY ’16 : 116 –
129. https://doi.org/10.1145/2967934.2968097  
35. David R. Dietrich. 2013. Avatars of Whiteness: 
Racial Expression in Video Game Characters. 
Sociological Inquiry  83, 1: 82 –105. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/soin.12001  
36. David R. Dietrich. 2013. Avatars of Whiteness: 
Racial Expression in Video Game Characters. 
Sociological Inquiry  83, 1: 82 –105. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/soin.12001  
37. K. E. Dill and M. C. R. Burgess. 2013. Influence of 
Black Masculinity Game Exempla rs on Social 
Judgments. Simulation & Gaming  44, 4: 562 –585. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1046878112449958  
38. Betsy DiSalvo and Amy Bruckman. 2010. Race and 
gender in play practices. In Proceedings of the Fifth 
International Conference on the Foundations of 
Digital Games - FDG ’10 , 56–63. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1822348.1822356  
39. Sara Douglass and Adriana J. Umaña -Taylor. 2015. 
A Brief Form of the Ethnic Identity Scale: 
Development and Empirical Validation. Identity  15, 
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 121: 48 –65. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/152834 88.2014.989442  
40. Jamie Mihoko Doyle and Grace Kao. 2007. Are 
Racial Identities of Multiracials Stable? Changing 
Self-Identification Among Single and Multiple 
Race Individuals. Social psychology quarterly  70, 
4: 405 –423. Retrieved September 3, 2017 from 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19823596  
41. Christopher Dring. 2015. More money is spent on 
games than movies and music combined, says IHS. 
MCV . Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://www.mcvuk.com/news/read/more -money -is-
spent -on-games -than-movies -and-music-combined -
says-ihs/0151059  
42. Maeve Duggan. 2015. Gaming and Gamers. Pew 
Research Center . Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/12/15/gaming -
and-gamers/  
43. Kate Edwards, Johanna Weststar, Wanda Meloni, 
Celia Pearce, and Marie -Josee Legault. 2014. 
Developer satisfaction survey 2014: Summary 
report . Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
https://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.igda.org/resource/c
ollection/9215B88F -2AA3 -4471 -B44D -
B5D58FF25DC7/IGDA_DSS_2014 -
Summary_Report.pdf  
44. Paul Ekman, Wallace V. Friesen, Maureen 
O’Sullivan, Anthony Chan, Irene Diacoyanni -
Tarlatzis, Karl Heider, Rainer Krause, William 
Ayhan LeCompte, Tom Pitcairn, Pio E. Ricci -Bitti, 
Klaus Scherer, Masatoshi Tomita, and Athanase 
Tzavaras. 1987. Universals and  cultural differences 
in the judgments of facial expressions of emotion. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  53, 4: 
712–717. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022 -
3514.53.4.712  
45. Frank Fang, Philip J Clapham, and Kevin C Chung. 
2011. A systematic review of interethnic variability 
in facial dimensions. Plastic and reconstructive 
surgery  127, 2: 874 –81. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/PRS.0b013e318200afdb  
46. Sabine Elizabeth French, Brett Russell Coleman, 
and Melissa Lee DiLorenzo. 2013. Linking Racial 
Identity, E thnic Identity, and Racial -Ethnic 
Socialization: A Tale of Three Race -Ethnicities. 
Identity  13, 1: 1 –45. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15283488.2012.747438  
47. William H. Frey. 2016. Diversity defines the 
millennial generation. Brookings Institute . 
Retrieved Jun e 30, 2017 from 
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/the -
avenue/2016/06/28/diversity -defines -the-
millennial -generation/  48. Jared Friedberg. Gender Games: A Content 
Analysis Of Gender Portrayals In Modern, 
Narrative Video Games. Retrieved from 
http://scholarwork s.gsu.edu/sociology_theses/52  
49. Stephanie A. Fryberg and Nicole M. Stephens. 
2010. When the World Is Colorblind, American 
Indians Are Invisible: A Diversity Science 
Approach. Psychological Inquiry  21, 2: 115 –119. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X.2010.483 847 
50. Stanley O. Gaines, Jr. 2001. Coping With 
Prejudice: Personal Relationship Partners as 
Sources of Socioemotional Support for Stigmatized 
Individuals. Journal of Social Issues  57, 1: 113 –
128. https://doi.org/10.1111/0022 -4537.00204  
51. Amedeo Giorgi.  1997. The Theory, Practice, and 
Evaluation of the Phenomenological Method as a 
Qualitative Research Procedure. Journal of 
Phenomenological Psychology  28, 2: 235 –260. 
https://doi.org/10.1163/156916297X00103  
52. Amedeo Giorgi. 2009. The descriptive 
phenomenological method in psychology : a 
modified Husserlian approach . Duquesne 
University Press.  
53. Christiana R. Glaubke, Patti Miller, McCrea A. 
Parker, and Eileen Espejo. 2001. Fair Play? 
Violence, Gender and Race in Video Games. 
Children now , 143: 3 8. Retrieved June 30, 2017 
from http://www.childrennow.org.  
54. Isabela Granic, Adam Lobel, and Rutger C.M.E. 
Engels. 2014. The benefits of playing video games. 
The American psychologist  69, 1: 66 –78. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0034857  
55. C. Shawn Green and  Daphne Bavelier. 2003. 
Action video game modifies visual selective 
attention. Nature  423, 6939: 534 –537. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01647  
56. Frederik De Grove, Verolien Cauberghe, and Jan 
Van Looy. 2016. Development and Validation of an 
Instrument for  Measuring Individual Motives for 
Playing Digital Games. Media Psychology  19, 1: 
101–125. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2014.902318  
57. Guang Guo, Yilan Fu, Hedwig Lee, Tianji Cai, 
Kathleen Mullan Harris, and Yi Li. 2014. Genetic 
bio-ancestry and social  construction of racial 
classification in social surveys in the contemporary 
United States. Demography  51, 1: 141 –72. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13524 -013-0242 -0 
58. Belinda Gutierrez, Anna Kaatz, Sarah Chu, Dennis 
Ramirez, Clem Samson -Samuel, and Molly Carn es. 
2014. “Fair Play”: A Videogame Designed to 
Address Implicit Race Bias Through Active 
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 13Perspective Taking. 3, 6: 371 –378. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/g4h.2013.0071  
59. Javier Harding. Black character creator options in 
video games still have a long way to go. Retr ieved 
June 30, 2017 from 
https://mic.com/articles/176085/black -character -
creator -options -in-video -games -still-have -a-long-
way-to-go 
60. E. Tory Higgins. 1989. Self -Discrepancy Theory: 
What Patterns of Self -Beliefs Cause People to 
Suffer? In Advances in Exp erimental Social 
Psychology . 93–136. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065 -2601(08)60306 -8 
61. E. T. Higgins. 1987. Self -discrepancy: a theory 
relating self and affect. Psychological review  94, 3: 
319–40. Retrieved September 5, 2017 from 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ pubmed/3615707  
62. Michael A. Hogg. 2000. Subjective Uncertainty 
Reduction through Self -categorization: A 
Motivational Theory of Social Identity Processes. 
European Review of Social Psychology  11, 1: 223 –
255. https://doi.org/10.1080/14792772043000040  
63. Deborah Son Holoien and J. Nicole Shelton. 2012. 
You deplete me: The cognitive costs of 
colorblindness on ethnic minorities. Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology  48, 2: 562 –565. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2011.09.010  
64. Gary R. Howard. 2016. We can’t te ach what we 
don’t know : white teachers, multiracial schools . 
Retrieved September 10, 2017 from 
https://books.google.ca/books?id=NiPrDAAAQBA
J&lr=  
65. Chuan Hu, Li Zhao, and Jiao Huang. 2015. 
Achieving self -congruency? Examining why 
individuals reconstruct their virtual identity in 
communities of interest established within social 
network platforms. 50: 465 –475. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.04.027  
66. Gita Jackson. 2017. At E3 2017, Black Characters’ 
Hair Looks Better Than Ever. Kotaku . Retrieved 
June 30, 2017 from http://kotaku.com/at -e3-2017 -
black -characters -hair-looks -better -than-eve-
1796139786/amp  
67. Charlene Jennett, Anna L. Cox, Paul Cairns, Samira 
Dhoparee, Andrew Epps, Tim Tijs, and Alison 
Walton. 2008. Measuring and defining the 
experience of immersion in games. International 
Journal of Human -Computer Studies  66, 9: 641 –
661. https://doi.org/10.101 6/J.IJHCS.2008.04.004  
68. Y. Kafai, M. Cook, and Deborah Fields. 2010. 
“Blacks Deserve Bodies Too!”; Design and 
Discussion About Diversity and Race in a Tween Virtual World. Games and Culture  1, 5: 43 –63. 
Retrieved September 5, 2017 from 
http://digitalcomm ons.usu.edu/itls_facpub/182  
69. T. Kanade, J.F. Cohn, and Yingli Tian. 
Comprehensive database for facial expression 
analysis. In Proceedings Fourth IEEE International 
Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture 
Recognition (Cat. No. PR00580) , 46–53. 
https://d oi.org/10.1109/AFGR.2000.840611  
70. David J. Kelly, Paul C. Quinn, Alan M. Slater, 
Kang Lee, Alan Gibson, Michael Smith, Liezhong 
Ge, and Olivier Pascalis. 2005. Three -month -olds, 
but not newborns, prefer own -race faces. 
Developmental Science  8, 6: F31 –F36. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467 -7687.2005.0434a.x  
71. Rebecca E. Kelly, Warren Mansell, and Alex M. 
Wood. 2015. Goal conflict and well -being: A 
review and hierarchical model of goal conflict, 
ambivalence, self -discrepancy and self -
concordance. 85, 212 –229. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2015.05.011  
72. Aniket Kittur, Ed H. Chi, and Bongwon Suh. 2008. 
Crowdsourcing user studies with Mechanical Turk. 
In Proceeding of the twenty -sixth annual CHI 
conference on Human factors in computing systems  
- CHI ’08 , 453 . 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357127  
73. Issie Laposky. 2015. It’s Netflix vs. Amazon in an 
Epic Content Face -Off. Wired . Retrieved June 30, 
2017 from https://www.wired.com/2015/04/cindy -
holland -vs-roy-price/  
74. Vincent Larivière, Chaoqun Ni, Yves Gi ngras, 
Blaise Cronin, and Cassidy R. Sugimoto. 2013. 
Bibliometrics: Global gender disparities in science. 
Nature  504, 7479: 211 –213. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/504211a  
75. Mark R. Leary and June Price. Tangney. 2012. 
Handbook of self and identity . Guilford Pr ess. 
76. D Leonard. 2004. High tech blackface: Race, 
sports, video games and becoming the other. 
Intelligent Agent  4: 1–5. Retrieved June 1, 2017 
from 
http://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&btnG=Sea
rch&q=intitle:High+Tech+Blackface+ --
+Race+,+Sports+Video+ Games+and+Becoming+th
e+Other#0  
77. David Leonard. 2003. “Live in Your World, Play in 
Ours”: Race, Video Games, and Consuming the 
Other. SIMILE: Studies In Media & Information 
Literacy Education  3, 4: 1 –9. 
https://doi.org/10.3138/sim.3.4.002  
78. David J. Le onard. High Tech Blackface. Retrieved 
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 14June 30, 2017 from 
http://www.intelligentagent.com/archive/Vol4_No4
_gaming_leonard.htm  
79. David J Leonard and C Richard King. 2009. 
Replaying Empire: Racialized Violence, Insecure 
Frontiers, and Displaced Terror in Contemporary 
Video Games. Ethnicity and Race in a Changing 
World  1, 2: 2 –14. 
https://doi.org/10.7227/ERCT.1.2.1  
80. Amy Shirong Lu, Tom Baranowski, Debbe 
Thompson, and Richa rd Buday. 2012. Story 
Immersion of Videogames for Youth Health 
Promotion: A Review of Literature. Games for 
health journal  1, 3: 199 –204. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/g4h.2011.0012  
81. Brenda Major and Toni Schmader. 1998. Coping 
with Stigma through Psychologic al Disengagement. 
In Prejudice . Elsevier, 219 –241. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978 -012679130 -3/50045 -4 
82. James E. Marcia. 2002. Identity and Psychosocial 
Development in Adulthood. Identity  2, 1: 7 –28. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/S1532706XID0201_02  
83. Michel Ma rriott. Blood, Gore, Sex and Now: Race. 
Retrieved June 27, 2017 from 
https://www.nytimes.com/1999/10/21/technology/b
lood-gore-sex-and-now-race.html  
84. Michel Marriott. 1999. Blood, Gore, Sex and Now: 
Race. The New York Times . Retrieved June 30, 
2017 from 
http://www.nytimes.com/1999/10/21/technology/bl
ood-gore-sex-and-now-race.html  
85. Abigail A. Marsh, Hillary Anger Elfenbein, and 
Nalini Ambady. 2003. Nonverbal “Accents.” 
Psychological Science  14, 4: 373 –376. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467 -9280.24461  
86. Winter Mason and Siddharth Suri. 2012. 
Conducting behavioral research on Amazon’s 
Mechanical Turk. Behavior Research Methods  44, 
1: 1–23. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428 -011-0124 -6 
87. Takahiko Masuda, Phoebe C. Ellsworth, Batja 
Mesquita, Janxin Leu, Shigehito  Tanida, and Ellen 
Van de Veerdonk. 2008. Placing the face in 
context: Cultural differences in the perception of 
facial emotion. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology  94, 3: 365 –381. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022 -3514.94.3.365  
88. David Matsumoto. 19 89. Cultural Influences on the 
Perception of Emotion. Journal of Cross -Cultural 
Psychology  20, 1: 92 –105. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022022189201006  
89. Janice McCabe. 2011. Doing Multiculturalism: An 
Interactionist Analysis of the Practices of a Multicultur al Sorority. Journal of Contemporary 
Ethnography  40, 5: 521 –549. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0891241611403588  
90. Peggy McIntosh. 1988. White privilege and male 
privilege : a personal account of coming to see 
correspondences through work in women’s studies . 
Wellesley College  Center for Research on Women, 
Wellesley  MA. Retrieved September 18, 2017 
from http://www.worldcat.org/title/white -privilege -
and-male -privilege -a-personal -account -of-coming -
to-see-correspondences -through -work -in-womens -
studies/oclc/19756 670 
91. Media and Entertainment. 2015. How Diverse Are 
Video Gamers --and the Characters They Play? 
Nielsen . Retrieved May 29, 2017 from 
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2015/h
ow-diverse -are-video -gamers -and-the-characters -
they-play.html  
92. Steve  Meretzky. 2001. Gamasutra - Building 
Character: An Analysis of Character Creation. 
Gamasutra . Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://www.gamasutra.com/view/feature/131887/bu
ilding_character_an_analysis_of_.php  
93. Steve Meretzky. 2001. Building Character: An  
Analysis of Character Creation. Gamasutra . 
Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://www.gamasutra.com/resource_guide/200111
19/meretzky_01.htm  
94. D. C. Molden, C. M. Hui, and A. A. Scholer. 2016. 
Understanding Self -Regulation Failure: A 
Motivated Effort -Alloca tion Account. . Elsevier, 
425–459. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978 -0-12-
801850 -7.00020 -2 
95. Rosalind C. Morris. 2010. Can the subaltern 
speak? : reflections on the history of an idea . 
Columbia University Press. Retrieved September 
18, 2017 from 
http://www.js tor.org/stable/10.7312/morr14384  
96. Yi Mou and Wei Peng. 2009. Gender and Racial 
Stereotypes in Popular Video Games. In Handbook 
of Research on Effective Electronic Gaming in 
Education . IGI Global, 922 –937. 
https://doi.org/10.4018/978 -1-59904 -808-6.ch053  
97. Evan Narcisse. 2017. The Natural: The Trouble 
Portraying Blackness in Video Games. Retrieved 
June 30, 2017 from http://kotaku.com/the -natural -
the-trouble -portraying -blackness -in-video -
1736504384  
98. Evan Narcisse. 2012. Come On, Video Games, 
Let’s See Some Black P eople I’m Not Embarrassed 
By. Kotaku . Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://kotaku.com/5897227/come -on-video -games -
lets-see-some -black -people -im-not-embarrassed -by 
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 1599. Evan Narcisse. 2017. The Natural: The Trouble 
Portraying Blackness in Video Games. Kotaku . 
Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://kotaku.com/the -natural -the-trouble -
portraying -blackness -in-video -1736504384  
100. NCSES. 2017. Women, Minorities, and Persons 
with Disabilities in Science and Engineering. - US 
National Science Foundation (NSF) . Retrieve d 
September 18, 2017 from 
https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2017/nsf17310/digest
/about -this-report/  
101. Nielsen.  2012.  True Prioritization is Key to 
Cultivating Multicultural Success. Retrieved June 
30, 2017 from 
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2012/tr
ue-prioritization -is-key-to-cultivating -multicultural -
success.html  
102. Nielsen.  2016.  Nielsen TV: Cultural Relevance Is 
Critical When Engaging with Hispanics. Retrieved 
June 30, 2017 from 
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2016/n
ielsen -tv-cultural -releva nce-is-critical -when -
engaging -with-hispanics.html  
103. Nielsen. 2017. Multicultural Millennials: The 
Multiplier Effect. Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/reports/2017
/multicultural -millennials --the-multiplier -
effect.html  
104. Nielsen. 2015. Tops of 2015: TV and Social Media. 
Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2015/t
ops-of-2015 -tv-and-social -media.html  
105. Nielsen. 2016. Hispanic Influence Reaches New 
Heights in the U.S. Nielsen Gaming . Retriev ed June 
30, 2017 from 
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2016/h
ispanic -influence -reaches -new-heights -in-the-
us.html  
106. Nielsen. 2017. For Us By Us? The Mainstream 
Appeal of Black Content. Nielsen Gaming . 
Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2017/f
or-us-by-us-the-mainstream -appeal -of-black -
content.html  
107. Nielsen Games. 2017. Games 360 U.S. report 2017. 
Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/reports/2017
/us-games -360-report-2017.html  
108. Nielson. 2017. Representation Matters: 
Engagement, Awareness and Likability of Asian 
American Content. Retrieved September 5, 2017 
from 
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2017/representation -matters -engagement -awareness -and-
likabi lity-of-asian -american -content.html  
109. Naomi W. Nishi, Cheryl E. Matias, and Roberto 
Montoya. 2015. Exposing the white avatar: 
projections, justifications, and the ever -evolving 
American racism. Social Identities  21, 5: 459 –473. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1 3504630.2015.1093470  
110. Naomi W Nishi, Cheryl E Matias, and Roberto 
Montoya. Exposing the white avatar: projections, 
justifications, and the ever -evolving American 
racism. 21, 5: 459 –473. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13504630.2015.1093470  
111. Amani Nuru -Jeter, David H Chae, Melisa Price, 
James Telesford, Rodolfo Mendoza -Denton, and 
Cheryl Woods -Giscombe. 2013. Abstract 9550: 
Anticipatory Racism Threat and Superwoman 
Schema: Elucidating the Relationship Between 
Racial Discrimination and Chronic Inflammation. 
Circulation  128, Suppl 22. Retrieved December 18, 
2017 from 
http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/128/Suppl_22/A
9550.short  
112. Daphna Oyserman. 2008. Racial -ethnic self -
schemas: Multidimensional identity -based 
motivation. Journal of Research in Personality  42, 
5: 1186 –1198. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2008.03.003  
113. Daphna Oyserman. 2017. Culture Three Ways: 
Culture and Subcultures Within Countries. Annual 
Review of Psychology  68, 1: 435 –463. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -psych -122414 -
033617  
114. Daphna  Oyserman and Mesmin Destin. 2010. 
Identity -based motivation: Implications for 
intervention. The Counseling psychologist  38, 7: 
1001 –1043. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0011000010374775  
115. Daphna Oyserman, Mesmin Destin, and Sheida 
Novin. 2015. The Context -Sensitive Future Self: 
Possible Selves Motivate in Context, Not 
Otherwise. Self and Identity  14, 2: 173 –188. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15298868.2014.965733  
116. Luca Papale. 2014. Beyond Identification: Defining 
the Relationships between Player and Avatar. 
Journal of Games Criticism  1, 2: 1 –12. Retrieved 
December 18, 2017 from 
http://gamescriticism.org/articles/papale -1-2/ 
117. Cale J Passmore, Rowan Yates, Max V Birk, and 
Regan L. Mandryk. 2017. Racial Diversity in Indie 
Games: Patterns, Challenges, and Opp ortunities. 
CHI PLAY Companion ’17: Proceedings of the 
2016 Annual Symposium on Computer -Human 
Interaction in Play Companion Extended Abstracts . 
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 16118. Andrew M. Penner. 2015. Gender inequality in 
science. Science  347, 6219. Retrieved July 12, 2017 
from 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/347/6219/234  
119. Anthony Daniel Perez and Charles Hirschman. 
2009. The Changing Racial and Ethnic 
Composition of the US Population: Emerging 
American Identities. Population and Development 
Review  35, 1: 1 –51. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1728 -
4457.2009.00260.x  
120. Claire Petitmengin. 2006. Describing one’s 
subjective experience in the second person: An 
interview method for the science of consciousness. 
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences  5, 3–4: 
229–269. https://doi.org /10.1007/s11097 -006-9022 -
2 
121. Claire Petitmengin. 2006. Describing one’s 
subjective experience in the second person: An 
interview method for the science of consciousness. 
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences  5, 3–4: 
229–269. https://doi.org/10.1007/s 11097 -006-9022 -
2 
122. Claire Petitmengin. 2010. A 
Neurophenomenological Study of Epileptic Seizure 
Anticipation. In Handbook of Phenomenology and 
Cognitive Science . Springer Netherlands, 
Dordrecht, 471 –499. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -
90-481-2646 -0_25  
123. Claire Petitmengin. 2011. Ten Years’ Viewing 
From Within: Further Debate. Retrieved September 
13, 2017 from https://philpapers.org/rec/PETTYV  
124. Jean S. Phinney and Anthony D. Ong. 2007. 
Conceptualization and measurement of ethnic 
identity: Current stat us and future directions. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology  54, 3: 271 –281. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022 -0167.54.3.271  
125. Alejandro Portes and Rub én G. Rumbaut. 2001. 
Legacies : the story of the immigrant second 
generation . University of California Press . 
Retrieved September 13, 2017 from 
https://books.google.ca/books/about/Legacies.html?
id=2hWsgN2P8gcC&redir_esc=y  
126. Naomi Priest, Jessica Walton, Fiona White, Emma 
Kowal, Alison Baker, and Yin Paradies. 2014. 
Understanding the complexities of ethnic -racial 
socialization processes for both minority and 
majority groups: A 30 -year systematic review. 
International Journal of Intercultural Relations  43: 
139–155. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJINTREL.2014.08.003  
127. Ralph J. Bunche Center for African American 
Studies at UCLA. NEW: 2017 Hollywood Diversity 
Report. Retrieved June 30, 2017 from http://www.bunchecenter.ucla.edu/index.php/2017/
02/new -2017 -hollywood -diversity -report/  
128. Chella Ramanan. 2017. The video game industry 
has a diversity problem – but it ca n be fixed. The 
Guardian . Retrieved from 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/mar
/15/video -game -industry -diversity -problem -
women -non-white -people  
129. Leonard Reinecke, Ron Tamborini, Matthew 
Grizzard, Robert Lewis, Allison Eden, and Nicholas 
David Bowman. 2012. Characterizing Mood 
Management as Need Satisfaction: The Effects of 
Intrinsic Needs on Selective Exposure and Mood 
Repair. Journal of Communication  62, 3: 437 –453. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460 -2466.2012.01649.x  
130. Laura Smart Richman and Charles Jonassaint. 
2008. The effects of race -related stress on cortisol 
reactivity in the laboratory: implications of the 
Duke lacrosse scandal. Annals of behavioral 
medicine : a publication of the Society of 
Behavioral Medicine  35, 1: 105 –10. 
https://doi .org/10.1007/s12160 -007-9013 -8 
131. Hila Riemer, Sharon Shavitt, Minkyung Koo, and 
Hazel Rose Markus. 2014. Preferences don’t have 
to be personal: Expanding attitude theorizing with a 
cross -cultural perspective. Psychological Review  
121, 4: 619 –648. https: //doi.org/10.1037/a0037666  
132. Kelley J. Robinson, Selina Mayer, Ashley Batts 
Allen, Meredith Terry, Ashley Chilton, and Mark 
R. Leary. 2016. Resisting self -compassion: Why are 
some people opposed to being kind to themselves? 
15, 5: 505 –524. 
https://doi.o rg/10.1080/15298868.2016.1160952  
133. Judd Ruggill, Ken McAllister, Randy Nichols, and 
Ryan Kaufman. 2016. Inside the Video Game 
Industry: Game Developers Talk About the 
Business of Play . Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
https://books.google.ca/books?hl=en&lr=&id=qCcl
DwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PP1&dq=.+Inside+the+
Video+Game+Industry:+Game+Developers+Talk+
About+the+Business+of+Play.+&ots=HYrArwBwa
k&sig=9Pqyhj6k -F-Nbm4iiVZ -6iw06xc  
134. Muniba Saleem and Craig A. Anderson. 2013. 
Arab s as terrorists: Effects of stereotypes within 
violent contexts on attitudes, perceptions, and 
affect. Psychology of Violence  3, 1: 84 –99. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0030038  
135. Pamela J. Sawyer, Brenda Major, Bettina J. Casad, 
Sarah S. M. Townsend, and Wen dy Berry Mendes. 
2012. Discrimination and the Stress Response: 
Psychological and Physiological Consequences of 
Anticipating Prejudice in Interethnic Interactions. 
American Journal of Public Health  102, 5: 1020 –
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 171026. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2011.300620  
136. Toni Schmader, Brenda Major, and Richard H. 
Gramzow. 2001. Coping With Ethnic Stereotypes 
in the Academic Domain: Perceived Injustice and 
Psychological Disengagement. Journal of Social 
Issues  57, 1: 93 –111. https://doi.org/10.1111/0022 -
4537.00203  
137. Adrienne Shaw. 2010. Identity, Identification, and 
Media Representation in Video Game Play: An 
audience reception study. Publicly Accessible Penn 
Dissertations . Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://repository.upenn.edu/edissertations/286  
138. Adrienne Sha w. 2013. On Not Becoming Gamers: 
Moving Beyond the Constructed Audience. Ada: A 
Journal of Gender, New Media, and Technology 1 , 
1–24. https://doi.org/10.7264/N33N21B3  
139. Rahil Sheikh. 2017. Video games: How big is 
industry’s racial diversity problem? - BBC News. 
BBC.com . Retrieved January 7, 2018 from 
http://www.bbc.com/news/technology -42357678  
140. Roger Smith and Adrienne Decker. 2016. 
Understanding the impact of QPOC representation 
in video games. In 2016 Research on Equity and 
Sustained Participation in Engineering, Computing, 
and Technology (RESPECT) , 1–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/RESPECT.2016.7836164  
141. Yoriko Sugiyama -Nakagiri, Keiichi Sugata, Akira 
Hachiya, Osamu Osanai, Atsushi Ohuchi, and 
Takashi Kitahara. 2009. Ethnic differences in the 
structu ral properties of facial skin. Journal of 
Dermatological Science  53, 2: 135 –139. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdermsci.2008.08.008  
142. Henri Tajfel. 1974. Social identity and intergroup 
behaviour. Information (International Social 
Science Council)  13, 2: 65 –93. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/053901847401300204  
143. Henri  Tajfel. 1981. Human groups and social 
categories : studies in social psychology . 
Cambridge University Press. Retrieved September 
13, 2017 from 
https://books.google.ca/books?id=ldA8AAAAIAAJ
&lr&sourc e=gbs_similarbooks  
144. Henri  Tajfel. 2010. Social identity and intergroup 
relations . Cambridge University Press. Retrieved 
September 13, 2017 from 
https://books.google.ca/books?id=q0wFY3Dcu1M
C&lr=&source=gbs_navlinks_s  
145. Katherine  Tarca. 2005. Colorbl ind in Control: The 
Risks of Resisting Difference Amid Demographic 
Change. Educational Studies  38, 2: 99 –120. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326993es3802_3  
146. Yaman Terzioglu. Immersion and identity in video games. Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://search. proquest.com/docview/1727612255/ab
stract/9EAC9C0529104232PQ/1  
147. The Critical Media Project. 2016. Race & Ethnicity. 
University of Southern California’s Annenberg 
School for Journalism and Communication . 
Retrieved January 5, 2018 from 
http://www.critical mediaproject.org/cml/topicbackg
round/race -ethnicity/  
148. This is Black Light. 2017. Racism in Science. Black 
Light . Retrieved September 18, 2017 from 
https://thisisblacklight.com/2017/02/23/racism -in-
science/  
149. Sabine Trepte and Leonard Reinecke. 2010.  Avatar 
creation and video game enjoyment. Journal of 
Media Psychology  22, 4: 171 –184. 
https://doi.org/10.1027/1864 -1105/a000022  
150. Adriana J. Umaña -Taylor, Ani Yazedjian, and 
Mayra Bámaca -Gómez. 2004. Developing the 
Ethnic Identity Scale Using Eriksonia n and Social 
Identity Perspectives. Identity  4, 1: 9 –38. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/S1532706XID0401_2  
151. Mao H Vang and Jesse Fox. 2014. Race in virtual 
environments: competitive versus cooperative 
games with black or white avatars. 
Cyberpsychology, behavio r and social networking  
17, 4: 235 –40. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2013.0289  
152. David Weibel and Bartholomäus Wissmath. 2011. 
Immersion in Computer Games: The Role of 
Spatial Presence and Flow. International Journal of 
Computer Games Technology  2011: 1 –14. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/282345  
153. Dmitri Williams, Nicole Martins, Mia Consalvo, 
and James D. Ivory. 2009. The virtual census: 
representations of gender, race and age in video 
games. New Media & Society  11, 5: 815 –834. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1 461444809105354  
154. Ashley Winning, M. Maria Glymour, Marie C. 
McCormick, Paola Gilsanz, and Laura D. 
Kubzansky. 2015. Psychological Distress Across 
the Life Course and Cardiometabolic Risk. Journal 
of the American College of Cardiology  66, 14: 
1577 –1586.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2015.08.021  
155. Bob G. Witmer and Michael J. Singer. 1998. 
Measuring Presence in Virtual Environments: A 
Presence Questionnaire. Presence: Teleoperators 
and Virtual Environments  7, 3: 225 –240. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/105474 698565686  
156. Eugenia Woo. 2017. Mythbusting diversity in video 
games: Why studios need to stop hiding behind 
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 18discredited excuses | The Spinoff. The Spinoff . 
Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
https://thespinoff.co.nz/games/08 -03-
2017/mythbusting -diversity -in-video-games -why-
studios -need -to-stop-hiding -behind -discredited -
excuses/  
157. Xavier Harding. 2017. Black character creator 
options in video games still have a long way to go. 
Mic Network . Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
https://mic.com/articles/176085/black -character -
creator -options -in-video -games -still-have -a-long-
way-to-go#.E02xL0GFg  
158. Grace S Yang. 2012. Do the Gender and Race of 
Video Game Characters Matter? The Effects of 
Violent Game Playing on Implicit Stereotyp ing and 
Aggressive Behavior. ProQuest Dissertations . 
Retrieved June 30, 2017 from 
http://search.proquest.com/docview/1143671001/ab
stract/552E272B70844DE3PQ/1  
159. Grace S. Yang, Bryan Gibson, Adam K. Lueke, L. 
Rowell Huesmann, and Brad J. Bushman. 2014. 
Effects of Avatar Race in Violent Video Games on 
Racial Attitudes and Aggression. Social 
Psychological and Personality Science  5, 6: 698 –704. https://doi.org/10.1177/1948550614528008  
160. Eunju Yoon. 2011. Measuring ethnic identity in the 
Ethnic Identity Scale and the Multigroup Ethnic 
Identity Measure -Revised. Cultural Diversity and 
Ethnic Minority Psychology  17, 2: 144 –155. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0023361  
161. Masaki Yuki, William Maddux , and Masuda 
Takahiko. 2007. Are the windows to the soul the 
same in the East and West? Cultural differences in 
using the eyes and mouth as cues to recognize 
emotions in Japan and the United States. Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology  43, 2: 303 –311. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JESP.2006.02.004  
162. The Focusing Institute. Index of All Focusing -
Oriented Psychotherapy Documents. Retrieved 
September 13, 2017 from 
https://www.focusing.org/gendlin/gol_all_fot.asp  
163. C.H.J.Tzou , P.Giov anoli , M. Ploner , and M. Freya . 
2005. Are there ethnic differences of facial 
movements between Europeans and Asians? British 
Journal of Plastic Surgery  58, 2: 183 –195. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BJPS.2004.10.014  
 
 
 
CHI 2018 Honourable Mention
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
Paper 383
Page 19