“Information-Backward but Sex-Forward”: Navigating Masculinity 
towards Intimate Wellbeing and Heterosexual Relationships 
Anupriya Tuli∗ 
IIIT-Delhi 
New Delhi, India 
anupriyat@iiitd.ac.in Azra Ismail∗ 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, USA 
azraismail@gatech.edu Karthik S. Bhat∗ 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, USA 
ksbhat@gatech.edu 
∗All three authors contributed equally to this paper. Pushpendra Singh 
IIIT-Delhi 
New Delhi, India 
psingh@iiitd.ac.in Neha Kumar 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, USA 
neha.kumar@gatech.edu 
ABSTRACT 
There has been a growing interest in reproductive health and inti-
mate wellbeing in Human-Computer Interaction, increasingly from 
an ecological perspective. Much of this work is centered around 
women’s experiences across diverse settings, emphasizing men’s 
limited engagement and need for greater participation on these 
topics. Our research responds to this gap by investigating cisgender 
men’s experiences of cultivating sexual health literacies in an urban 
Indian context. We leverage media probes to stimulate focus group 
discussions, using popular media references on men’s fertility to 
elicit shared refection. Our fndings uncover the role that humor 
and masculinity play in shaping men’s perceptions of their sexual 
health and how this infuences their sense of agency and participa-
tion in heterosexual intimate relationships. We further discuss how 
technologies might be designed to support men’s participation in 
these relationships as supportive partners and allies. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI. 
KEYWORDS 
Sexual health and wellbeing, Men, Heterosexual relationships, Taboo, 
Media probes 
ACM Reference Format: 
Anupriya Tuli, Azra Ismail, Karthik S. Bhat, Pushpendra Singh, and Neha 
Kumar. 2023. “Information-Backward but Sex-Forward”: Navigating Mas-
culinity towards Intimate Wellbeing and Heterosexual Relationships. In 
Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’23), April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany. ACM, New York, 
NY, USA , 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581478 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the 
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specifc permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9421-5/23/04...$15.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581478 00 1 INTRODUCTION 
An emergent body of research in the feld of Human-Computer 
Interaction (HCI) research examines the role of technology in sup-
porting reproductive health and intimate wellbeing. A signifcant 
focus thus far has been on women’s experiences with such tech-
nologies (e.g.,[2]), but recent studies have highlighted men’s limited 
participation in discourses around reproductive health across life 
transitions (e.g., puberty [82] and parenthood [66, 67]) and social 
settings (e.g., schools [82], homes [48, 49], and online [53]). Scholars 
have uncovered how men’s online engagements around reproduc-
tive health topics may be shaped by privacy needs and perceived 
threats to one’s “masculinity” [63]. The limited spaces to engage 
on this topic may not only have a profound impact on men’s expe-
riences with their own sexual health and wellbeing, but can also 
shape their participation as potential allies and supportive partners. 
Our paper contributes to this nascent yet growing interest within 
the HCI community in developing a deeper understanding of men’s 
experiences around intimate wellbeing [63]. We align ourselves 
with emerging ecological perspectives on gendered health and 
wellbeing in HCI more broadly, which have additionally conveyed 
how important it is for men to play a supportive role in matters 
concerning sexual, reproductive, and/or maternal and child health 
[40, 66]. In this paper, we examine cisgender men’s experiences 
with information sources around sexual health, and how these 
experiences shape their participation in intimate relationships. We 
wish to make explicit here that identity as a man may not mean 
having male body parts, nor is it a confrmation of heterosexual 
orientation. We situate our research in the Indian cultural context, 
where the fear of embarrassment results in little to no conversation 
on sexual and reproductive health (e.g., [58, 81–83]). Our research 
investigates the following questions in this setting: 
(1) How do cisgender men seeking heterosexual relationships 
navigate cultural taboos to acquire literacies around their 
sexual health and wellbeing, and what challenges do they 
encounter in the process? 
(2) In cultural contexts where sex is taboo, how might technol-
ogy play a role in supporting men’s information-seeking and 
sharing behaviors around sexual health and wellbeing, to 
eventually target their participation as supportive partners 
and allies in intimate relationships?CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Tuli, Ismail, and Bhat et al. 
We         
pants, supplemented with data collected through an online survey 
that garnered 106 responses. To facilitate refection on a taboo topic, 
we adapted the cultural probe technique [34] to use media probes 
to stimulate focus group discussions, leveraging references from 
popular Hindi media on men’s fertility to provide a shared cultural 
context. Our participants were cisgender men of Indian origin, who 
either had experience with or were seeking heterosexual relation-
ships. Through our analysis, we unpack the barriers for men in 
seeking, constructing, and operationalizing sexual health literacy. 
We also present how the gaps they experience from a young age 
shape their participation in intimate relationships. Our paper thus 
contributes, as the research questions outline, an understanding 
of the social construction of masculinity and humor that shapes 
information-seeking and sharing around sexual health among men, 
and the role that technology design might play in enabling and sup-
porting men’s participation in intimate relationships as supportive 
partners and allies. 
We begin by frst situating our work at the intersection of re-
search on health communication, reproductive health and intimate 
wellbeing in HCI, and methodological approaches taken to tackle 
taboo topics. We then describe how we used media probes to facili-
tate and nurture discussions on a sensitive topic. We next present 
our fndings around cultivating sexual health literacy, and discuss 
the role that masculinity and humor play in this context. Finally, 
we refect on our experiences with the methodological approach 
we employed, drawing inspiration from principles of feminist HCI 
[13, 14, 69] towards enabling men’s positive participation in dis-
courses around sexual and reproductive health and wellbeing. 
Content warning: This paper uses explicit language to discuss 
sexual health and wellbeing, particularly when describing our par-
ticipants’ lived experiences with cultivating sexual health literacies 
and participation in intimate relationships. conducted 5 remote focus group discussions with 19 partici -
2 RELATED WORK 
Our paper contributes to a rich and growing body of HCI literature 
on reproductive health and intimate wellbeing. Prior research in this 
space has examined embodied experiences across life transitions 
ranging from menarche [67, 73] to menopause [21, 50], including 
the study of intimate care [1, 4], sexuality [25, 45], and cultural and 
religious perspectives [60, 75]. Early research largely centered on 
the individual experience of intimate health and wellbeing, such 
as technologies for teaching female pelvic ftness [5] and tracking 
the menstrual cycle [26]. Several studies have also highlighted how 
these technologies have been designed with “stereotypically femi-
nine attributes” to focus on women users, thus excluding not just 
sexual and gender minorities but also men who may want to engage 
in such topics [26, 56]. The Menstruating Machine is one of the 
few eforts at the intersection of technology and speculative design 
that explicitly targets non-menstruators and tries to engage them 
in conversation [11]. In recent times, HCI research has also been 
increasingly taking an ecological perspective, as refected in studies 
on involving parents in ofering support during menarche [67], and 
partners in female fertility care [22, 30, 37, 40]. 
Our research builds on emergent work on ecological perspec-
tives on sexual health and wellbeing, as well the growing focus on men’s participation on the topics of reproductive health [63], family 
planning [66], and parenthood [7, 8, 53] in online spaces. Much 
of the work in sexual health and wellbeing is an efort to bridge 
the long-standing information gap, given the subject’s sensitive 
nature. For instance, Patel et al. have studied how men undergoing 
fertility treatment engage in online fora to seek personalized advice 
and emotional support, and how perceptions of masculinity shape 
their experience [63]. Perrier et al. have studied the male partner’s 
participation in a text-messaging intervention for maternal health 
and family planning in Kenya [66]. Researchers have also ques-
tioned normative understandings of men’s sexuality, for instance, 
by highlighting how forum discussions on men’s intimate relation-
ships with sex dolls refects self-care [76, 87]. Beyond research on 
reproductive health and intimate wellbeing, HCI scholars have also 
examined how men navigate perceptions of masculinity in other 
spaces. Ammari and Schoenebeck [6–8] and Lukof et al. [53] have 
studied men’s engagement with social media around fatherhood 
experiences. Rubin et al. have uncovered how online gender harass-
ment may be linked to men’s anxieties about fulflling normative 
masculine gender roles. Others have studied how toxic masculinity 
can shape information-seeking behaviors in eating disorder commu-
nities online that are predominantly men [ 64], and deter veterans 
with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) from seeking mental 
health support [29]. 
Given the signifcant information gaps on sexual and reproduc-
tive health that many studies have highlighted, HCI scholars have 
also considered the role that technology may play in sex educa-
tion. Sorcar et al. have previously designed culturally-appropriate 
content on HIV education for classrooms [75], and Tuli et al. have 
investigated the gaps in menstrual health education in India [82]. 
Other studies have also examined sensemaking around one’s sex-
ual health and the acquisition of sexual health literacies online— 
particularly around adolescence [68, 86], menstrual sensemaking 
[32, 42], and menopause [12]—also noting how users work around 
stigma associated with sexual health conditions [55]. Our work 
contributes to HCI’s understanding of men’s sensemaking around 
their sexual health both online and ofine, in a highly taboo setting. 
Undertaking this research entailed acknowledging and account-
ing for the challenges around data collection on a sensitive topic 
and/or participant engagement in a sensitive context. Social and 
cultural taboos heavily infuence conversations on sensitive topics 
like sexual health and intimate wellbeing. Participants’ fears around 
being stigmatized or prior trauma can also afect data collection 
around these topics, making it imperative for researchers to “navi-
gate the efects of stigma sensitively and carefully because of the 
feelings of shame, isolation and pain stemming from negative expe-
riences” [24]. Many HCI researchers have employed non-traditional 
methods to address these barriers and foster safe spaces and com-
fort for participants when engaging with sensitive topics. Prior 
work has involved the use of diverse probes such as catalogs [31], 
photographs [33], postcards [41], activity worksheets [3, 9], comic 
books [80], and digital artifacts [37, 40] as ice-breakers to ofer 
vocabulary and nurture environments that encourage sharing of 
difcult personal stories on otherwise taboo topics. HCI researchers 
have also explored playfulness as an efective tool to circumvent 
social awkwardness around topics like intimate health [5]. For in-
stance, games can help initiate conversations around menstruationNavigating Masculinity towards Intimate Wellbeing and Heterosexual Relationships CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
[42, 51, 79] and sex education [85]. Several studies have also cu-
rated Do-It-Yourself (DIY) kits for participants to understand their 
experiences with intimate wellbeing [19, 74, 77]. Additionally, prior 
research has noted humor as an enabler for challenging stereo-
types and “expression of ideas which would otherwise be rejected, 
criticized or censored” (e.g., [5, 35, 36, 43]). Our work takes inspi-
ration from such non-traditional methods. In particular, we adapt 
cultural probes [34] through the use of media probes to stimulate 
focus group discussions, leveraging popular humorous Hindi media 
references on men’s fertility to provide a shared cultural context 
and create comfort with the topic. We also adopt the principles of 
self-disclosure and advocacy described in feminist HCI literature 
[13, 14, 69], by constructing a third space for our participants to 
enable our focus group sessions, as described in more detail in our 
methods section [15, 16]. Bhabha describes a third space as a space 
with blurred cultural and identity boundaries to nurture new possi-
bilities while encouraging new ways of cultural meaning-making 
(ibid). We draw on Tuli et al.’s work that encourages the reimagining 
and creation of third spaces in taboo contexts [83]. Our paper ofers 
an understanding of men’s acquisition of sexual health literacies 
that emerged through discussions in such a third space, as well 
as methodological refections on the experience of constructing a 
third space for participant engagement on a taboo topic. 
3 METHODS 
Our study was approved by Institutional Review Board at the Geor-
gia Institute of Technology and IIIT-Delhi and took place between 
May 2021 and June 2022. We sought to develop an understanding 
of prevalent approaches—and barriers—to cultivating sexual health 
and wellbeing among Indian men. Thus we took a qualitative ap-
proach, recruiting cis men of Indian origin to participate in a survey 
and focus group discussions, as detailed below. We used short video 
clips, from recent popular media, that addressed topics of men’s re-
productive health and fertility as probes to facilitate discussion. We 
next describe our participant recruitment criteria, study methods, 
and data analysis approach. 
3.1 Participant Recruitment Criteria and 
Limitations 
Given our research goals, and responding to the research gap in 
this area of investigation, our recruitment criteria was designed to 
broadly include cisgender men of Indian origin—aged 21 or older— 
who had experience with or were seeking heterosexual relation-
ships. Fluency in English (for the survey and focus groups) and 
Hindi (for the focus groups) were additional asks, since the partici-
pants were asked to engage with popular media clips in a mix of 
the two languages. We relied on networks accessible to us to recruit 
participants using snowball, convenience, and purposive sampling 
[28], after having had limited success with public fora—such as 
social media—for recruitment. The sensitivity around the subject 
meant that recruitment was a challenge (e.g., [44, 59, 71]), and it 
took us a long time to identify willing participants, who ended up 
being from India and the USA (see Table 1)—also where the research 
team is located (see Section 3.4). 
The language constraints meant that our study naturally ex-
cluded the perspectives of those who did not speak Hindi and English fuently. Although we did not include caste or class in our 
inclusion criteria, and did not ask about participants’ caste or class, 
it is very likely that our recruitment eforts were more successful 
in reaching those closer to us—with predominantly upper caste 
and middle-income backgrounds. We did ask questions about re-
ligion and sexuality, and these attributes are listed in Table 1. We 
invite future eforts to delve further into these and diferent inter-
sections surrounding Indian identities; our study is—to the best 
of our knowledge—the frst and preliminary study that hopefully 
invites others to build on our work. 
3.2 Survey  
We conducte d a preliminar y online survey to understand Indian 
men’s online information-se eking behaviors around sexual health
and wellness. We provided our respondents with the World Health
Organization’s  defnition  of sexual health as “a state of physical ,
emotional,  mental and social well-being in relation to sexuality ”
[62]. We expande d this defnition  to include a focus on a positiv e
and respectful approach to sexuality and sexual relationships.  The
survey gauge d primar y information  sources, engagement  with on-
line health information-se eking, demographics,  and flter questions .
The flter questions  captur ed the age, sexual orientation,  the ex-
perience of heter osexual relationships,  and their consent. Some
questions  were multiple choice , such as, “What are your primar y
sources of information  around sexual health and wellbeing?” “In this
list, whom would you be comfortable  talking to about the subje ct?”
“Hav e you followed or engage d in conv ersations about sexual health
and wellbeing on any online platforms?”  Others were more open-
ende d: “Please describ e the online health group/page that you joine d,
and what motivate d you to be part of it,” “What hesitations  might you
have in participating  in such a group/page?”  We analyze d the open-
ende d questions  using thematic analysis [18]. Examples  of codes
include d “community  supp ort,” “anonymity ,” “credibility of informa -
tion,” “fear of creating stigmatize d identity ,” etc. For the remaining
questions,  we calculate d percentages. 
The survey was administer ed in English via Qualtrics.  We fol-
lowed purp osive sampling to recruit respondents through mailing
lists and social media. All authors shared the survey link, along with
a fyer detailing the objective of the study , across their personal and
social netw orks, requesting wide dissemination.  Only participants
who indicate d that they met all recruitment  criteria detaile d above
were eligible to fll out the entir e survey. As a result of this recruit-
ment metho d, our dataset containe d a largely self-sele cted pool of
men who showed some inclination  to engage on this topic. Even
so, our survey received 224 hits over three months; 46 respondents
only responde d to flter questions,  30 only flled in demographic
details, 29 did not attempt the survey, 10 did not consent, and 3
responde d with garbage values. This left us with a clean dataset
of 106 responses. These numb ers, and the relativ ely low response
rate to this survey in general, are indicativ e of the population’s
reluctance  towards discussing  sexual health, given the fear of cre-
ating stigmatize d identities  when engaging  with conv ersational
taboos. We used our learnings  from the survery recruitment  expe-
rience and the survey data to inform focus group protocol and later
corroborate our focus group fndings.CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Tuli, Ismail, and Bhat et al. 
Demographic Survey (106) Focus groups (19) 
Age (yrs.) Min 21, Max 37, Median 24, Not answered (60) Min 23, Max 32, Median 27 
Gender Man (106) Man (19) 
Sexual orientation Straight (31), Heterosexual (6), Homosexual (1), Male 
(3), Garbage value (3), Prefer not to answer (2), Not 
attempted (60) Straight (9), Heterosexual (8), Bisexual (1), Not 
answered (1) 
Relationship status Previously in a relationship (10), Currently married/in a 
relationship (18), Not been in a relationship before (16), 
Prefer not to answer (2), Not attempted (60) Previously in a relationship (2), Currently mar-
ried/in a relationship (10), Never been in a re-
lationship before (3), Prefer not to answer (4) 
Religion Hindu (30), Muslim (1), Jain (1), Agnostic (6), Athiest 
(4), Garbage value (1), Other (1), Prefer not to answer 
(2), Not attempted (60) Hindu (14), Jain (1), Agnostic (1), Other (2), 
Prefer not to answer (1) 
Table 1: Demographic details of our participants across methods. The participant-reported sexual orientation data refects the 
lack of sexual health literacy in the study context. We recruited participants using a combination of convenience sampling and 
purposive sampling [28]. The participant survey responses are labeled SP#. We highlight here that a few of our respondents 
provided garbage value, including ofensive content and random letters, in the demographics section. Given the associated 
taboos, these garbage values indicate how the subject matter is approached and perceived in the study context. 
Participant FGD# Sexual orientation Relationship status Age (yrs.) Location 
Rishi 1 Straight Currently married/in a relationship 25 Atlanta, USA 
Avi 1 Straight Currently married/in a relationship 26 Sunnyvale, USA 
Chirag 1 Straight Never been in a relationship before 25 Atlanta, USA 
Rohit 1 Straight Currently married/in a relationship 25 Palo Alto, USA 
Sameer 2 Prefer not to answer Prefer not to answer 24 Mumbai, India 
Arjun 2 Heterosexual Currently married/in a relationship 32 Delhi, India 
Ram 2 Straight Currently married/in a relationship 27 Mumbai, India 
Vikram 2 Straight Prefer not to answer 27 Delhi, India 
Dev 3 Heterosexual Currently married/in a relationship 27 Delhi, India 
Pankaj 3 Straight Currently married/in a relationship 30 Bangalore, India 
Karan 3 Heterosexual Currently married/in a relationship 24 Delhi, India 
Rohan 3 Heterosexual Prefer not to answer 25 Bangalore, India 
Raj 4 Heterosexual Currently married/in a relationship 28 Atlanta, USA 
Madhav 4 Heterosexual Currently married/in a relationship 31 Atlanta, USA 
Raghu 4 Heterosexual Previously in a relationship 27 Bangalore, India 
Dilip 4 Heterosexual Prefer not to answer 31 Delhi, India 
Sahil 5 Straight Previously in a relationship 27 Delhi, India 
Bhanu 5 Bisexual Never been  in a relationship before 23 Delhi, India 
Angad 5
 Straight Never been in a relationship before 32 Mumbai, India 
Table 2: This table includes our focus group participants’ detailed demographic information, including self-described details 
about their sexual orientation and relationship status. All names are researcher-assigned pseudonyms. 
3.3 Focus Groups and Media Probes 
We conducted fve focus group sessions to develop a deeper un-
derstanding of the experiences of men with sexual health literacy 
and its impact on their association with their bodies and their inti-
mate relationships. Given the sensitivity of the topic, and the taboo 
surrounding it, we employed focus groups as a way to encourage 
disclosure despite existing taboos. This choice was informed by 
literature on qualitative research in sensitive contexts that found 
that group interactions empowered participants to contribute to 
conversations by observing others around them opening up about 
sensitive, taboo topics [23, 47, 70]. Adapting the idea of cultural 
probes [34], we used four short clips from Indian media that ad-
dressed the topics of men’s reproductive health and men’s fertility as probes for our sessions (see Table 3). These clips refect the expe-
riences and conversations around men’s reproductive health in our 
study context, focusing on cisgender men and heterosexual rela-
tionships. Situated in the Indian cultural context, they helped us to 
ofer a vocabulary to approach a conversational taboo while serving 
as ice-breakers. We curated the set of clips across multiple brain-
storming sessions among the authors based on their experiences 
with the study context (see Section 3.4). 
We followed these video clips with semi-structured discussions, 
where we began by asking direct questions like “What about this 
video made you uncomfortable?” and “Could you relate to the charac-
ter’s experience?” to initiate discussions on taboo topics. These were 
followed by guiding questions probing diferent aspects associated 
with the theme of each clip. The sample questions included: “Does 
this video remind you of any conversations in the past where peopleNavigating Masculinity towards Intimate Wellbeing and Heterosexual Relationships CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
Video Description Probe theme 
Video-1 Ask the Sexpert [57, 72]: A documentary about Dr. Mahinder Watsa’s 
popular newspaper column on sexual health. The 1.5-minute clip starts with 
the doctor reading a question from his column—“. . . my wife prefers to insert 
a ripe banana into her vagina instead of my penis. She says I can not satisfy 
her. She is depressed.” Served as an ice-breaker to prompt a discussion around 
access, familiarity, and engagement with various sources 
of information on sexual and reproductive health and 
wellbeing. 
Video-2 Mirzapur [84]: A popular Amazon Web Series centered around a mafa fam-
ily. In a 3-minute clip, the mafa don is talking about his erectile dysfunction 
to a doctor in euphemisms and in the second person, pretending the actual 
patient is the large man who has accompanied him to the consultation. To unpack the use of euphemistic language to talk about 
men’s fertility and how men’s fertility might be linked to 
notions of masculinity and status in the community. 
Video-3 Man’s Best Friend [10]: A 9-minute comedy sketch hosted on YouTube 
where the personifcation of the man’s penis accuses the man of being 
ashamed of him. The video depicted the protagonists’ concerns with erectile 
dysfunction, sexual performance, masturbation, and penis length. To elicit refections about the participants’ association 
with and expectations from their bodies. 
Video-4 Lust Stories [61]: An 80-second clip presented a conversation between a 
married couple, where the husband is taken aback when the wife brings up 
her sexual needs and desire for pleasure indirectly by referencing pornog-
raphy. This Netfx flm pushes cultural boundaries by bringing discourse 
around women’s pleasure into mainstream media. To facilitate refections on participant’s comfort and sense 
of agency in discussing their and their partner’s pleasure, 
and on culturally-situated gender roles and expectations 
in intimate heterosexual relationships. 
Table 3: This table includes a brief description of the four media clips we used to facilitate discussion during our remote focus 
group sessions. An elaborated description of each clip are available in the supplementary materials. 
used euphemisms? If yes, who were these conversations with, and in 
what settings?” “Do you think there is an expectation in intimate rela-
tionships from men to lead or know it all?” We note that these clips 
were chosen to seed conversations on a plethora of potential topics 
in this space, including access to and engagement with information 
sources around sexual health, sexual pleasure and expectations 
from one’s body, and gendered expectations around sexual perfor-
mance and intimate wellbeing in heterosexual relationships. Given 
the sensitivity of the topics, we prioritized our participants’ comfort 
in sharing their experiences—ensuring that they could draw bound-
aries in terms of what they would like to share with the group and 
the researchers. The topics that were discussed, therefore, were 
a result of participants’ lived experiences with sexual health and 
wellbeing, and comfort with broaching and discussing them. 
Given the taboo associated with the topic of investigation, we 
carefully designed our sessions to ofer a third space [15, 16] to our 
participants, drawing inspiration from the principles of feminist 
HCI [13, 14]. Our goal was to nurture an “interruptive, interrogative, 
and enunciative” space to challenge, critique, and question the 
existing social construction of identities, bodies, gender, and culture 
[15]. We conducted 90-minute sessions over Zoom calls, requesting 
the participants to use pseudonyms as display names and leaving 
it to their discretion to mute their videos. A cis man researcher 
moderated the session, and two cis women researchers took notes 
and handled the call logistics. The women researchers introduced 
themselves at the start of the call, informing participants that they 
would be passive participants during the call. We employed this 
approach so that we could facilitate a conversation where the efects 
of gender dynamics on engaging with a topic were minimized. To 
further align with our goal of nurturing a third space, the women 
researchers kept their videos muted. 
We conducted a second recruitment drive for the focus groups 
following limited interest in participation in the survey responses. 
We recruited participants using purposive and snowball sampling [28] by sharing the study fyer on social media in addition to the re-
cruitment survey (see Table 2). The call for participation explained 
the nature of the content we would present in the remote focus 
groups as “depictions of men’s fertility in popular Hindi media, 
such as video clips from Bollywood movies, Indian comedians, and 
documentaries.” We faced recruitment challenges along the same 
lines as our earlier survey in conducting these focus group sessions. 
The demographic make-up of each focus group session was a result 
of the responses we received in the weeks prior, and the availabil-
ity of all participants. We conducted focus group discussions as 
and when we had four survey responses expressing willingness to 
participate in our research. 
The data collected was in the form of video recordings, chat 
logs, and the researchers’ notes. These sessions were primarily con-
ducted in English and later transcribed for analysis. We analyzed 
the collected data using inductive thematic analysis [18], where 
we read and open-coded each transcript line by line. Three of the 
authors individually read through and coded, line-by-line, the frst 
two focus group transcripts. They then discussed their individual 
codes to resolve disagreements and arrive at a consensus about the 
codes to employ. These codes were then used as a guide for analyz-
ing subsequent focus group transcripts. Example codes included: 
“sexual health is personal, ” “men discuss relationships but not sexual 
health among themselves, ” “jocular and non-serious approach, ” “pres-
sure on the man to perform, ” and “humor makes taboos approachable. ” 
The open codes resulted in 50 axial codes over multiple iterations, 
which guided the structure of our fndings section. Sample axial 
codes include: “expectations to be sexually literate, ” “social media for 
sex education, ” “pornography and sexual health, ” “humor to sidestep 
taboo, ” “communicating with partner, ” and “media and stereotypes. ” 
3.4 Positionality 
All authors are cisgender, of Indian origin, and have conducted 
feldwork on public health topics in India, including a more generalCHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Tuli, Ismail, and Bhat et al. 
focus on women’s health, wellbeing, and empowerment. As a group, 
we come from diverse cultural and religious backgrounds, where 
two of us identify as men and the rest as women. We all have 
lived experiences and observations around cultivating sexual health 
literacy and the media’s approach to the subject while growing 
up in contexts culturally similar to that of our study. Currently, 
two of us live in India, while the rest frequently cross borders 
between the USA and India. We are all strong advocates of social 
equity and justice with a motivation to leverage technology design 
towards carving equitable futures. We approached this research 
by building on learnings from working at the intersection of HCI, 
gender equity, and global development. Our inclination toward 
prioritizing the needs and interests of women and gender minorities, 
and understanding how these are embedded in complex ecologies, 
has motivated this study design and shaped our data analysis. 
4 FINDINGS 
We frst present how the taboos around sex shaped the conversa-
tions on men’s sexual health in our study context. We then discuss 
the approaches that our participants took to construct an under-
standing of their own sexual health, from adolescence to adulthood, 
in both online and ofine spaces. Finally, we unpack the role of hu-
mor and masculinity in shaping the conversations and construction 
of knowledge around men’s sexual health. 
4.1 “Sex is Nobody’s Problem and Nobody’s 
Business” 
Our participants repeatedly highlighted how challenging it was 
for them to talk about intimate and reproductive health and well-
being on account of restrictive cultural taboos around sex. Our 
participants expressed that sex could be talked about, but only in 
very particular contexts, such as procreation, and certainly not in 
terms of pleasure. As Avi noted,“Have you or anyone else in this 
call ever learned or heard about sex outside the context of having 
children, like for pleasure or, just as a way of life sort of context in 
our customs?!” Like Avi’s belief that it was customary to not bring 
up sex in conversation, Rohit also mentioned the “Indian uncle’s 
response”: “There is the Indian uncle’s response like, ‘Oh, don’t talk 
about sex! Like, no, no, no!’ And kind of avoiding the questions [about 
sex] in many ways is a knee-jerk reaction to the extreme kind of glam-
orization or spotlight that is put on sex as an aspiration or a goal. . . So 
there is a reaction like wait, wait, wait, what’s going on? Just shut up, 
don’t talk about it. . . go study, focus on homework, that kind of thing. ” 
These conversations, typically considered awkward and avoidable, 
are abruptly deemed important and necessary when it is time for 
marriage, as expressed by Angad: 
“These conversations actually do not happen in child-
hood. Suddenly whenever you get married, it is sup-
posed to happen that day and suddenly, you know, 
some guys come [to guide] this is how you should do. 
You know, even your parents also sometimes [come 
and talk], ‘beta ye karna vo karna’ (son, do try this and 
that) [laughs]. Kind of, so they try to be open, which 
becomes very awkward because you have never spo-
ken these things until now.” (Angad, FGD-5) This prevalent mindset that “[sex] is nobody’s problem and no-
body’s business” (Avi) resulted in minimally informative discourse 
on the subject through most of our participants’ lives. Consequently, 
the onus remains on men to “be mature enough to accept these things” 
(SP12) and construct sexual health literacies because “there is a 
stereotype that ‘men do not ask for directions, ’ right? That is it. . . ! 
Like, you should know it! Right? Or you do what you do” (Raj). Par-
ticipants additionally refected on the origins of the taboo nature 
of sex, stressing that this had to do with Western notions, because 
traditional Indian sources openly depicted sexual imagery: 
“It is really weird that as Indians we do not talk about 
sex like it is considered taboo. But we go any like 
temple, you will see all sorts of naked fgures and it is 
there in culture. But I think the taboo is not necessarily 
around sex, but around the western connotation of 
how sex is perceived. So there is something about that 
imagery. . . I mean, even though we have like a whole 
book on sex, [but] culturally, as a society, the place 
that sex has in one’s life is seen as it is just one of the 
many things you do and like it is not given as much 
attention as an activity that can be pleasurable and 
can be a kind of a core component of one’s identity. ” 
(Rohit, FGD-1) 
The challenges that surround talking about sex are not particular 
to Indian contexts, but as our data shows, they are abundantly 
present in the Indian contexts our participants came from. The 
following sections will draw and build on this fnding. 
4.2 Constructing Sexual Health Literacy 
We next detail how our participants constructed their understand-
ing of sexual health from adolescence to adulthood. We bring fo-
cus to the cultural and infrastructural factors infuencing knowl-
edge construction. We describe the instances where these methods 
proved sufcient and where our participants expressed a need for 
more information-seeking support. 
4.2.1 Sex Education at Home and in the School. Our participants 
recounted their early experiences seeking answers to questions 
about sexual health. For many, these occurred in formal settings 
like in their schools. Our participants noted a variety of ways in 
which educational curricula attempted to provide sex education in 
a “sterile” way (also observed by Tuli et al. [82]), with a focus on 
the standardized assessments rather than their learning: 
“I think in 10th standard biology class, the reproduc-
tion chapter has two pages dedicated to contracep-
tion, sex, and all sorts of stuf. Even today, you’ll 
see most bio teachers will just get somebody in the 
class to read it out. And then they will mark the 
multiple choice questions and the long answer ques-
tions that you need to know from this, ‘what are 
the three types of contraceptives available? what is 
the diference between X and Y?’...there will be like 
three or four cookie-cutter board exam questions that 
you need...there is no discussion, no discourse, no 
Q&A. . . and there is no like empathy like overall, it is 
just treated in a very sterile way.” (Avi, FGD-1)Navigating Masculinity towards Intimate Wellbeing and Heterosexual Relationships CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
The ensuing discussions touched upon issues around the best modal-
ity for providing sexual health education—comic strips, textbooks, 
videos, or facilitated by teachers or other adults. A key issue Rohan 
brought up involved teachers “who actually are aware about the 
whole idea of human body. . . are not comfortable talking about it, ” 
even as they were tasked to teach it themselves. Finally, highlight-
ing the idiosyncratic nature of sex education delivery across schools 
and geographies, some participants explained how their schools 
tried various methods of sex education delivery including having 
smaller classroom-level discussions, speaking to a large group of 
students in an auditorium, and having sex education classes for 
only a smaller set of students and not for others. Raj, describing 
his experience, shared: “In my school, funnily enough, they would 
do these classes and they tried diferent kinds of permutations. . . the 
girls would get the class—they would go for it, but the guys would not 
get it. And I did not understand why they [the school] ever did that. 
At some point, it just became much more like, either you should be a 
particular [year], or you should know [it already]. ” 
Some participants described growing up in an open learning en-
vironment in the home, allowing them to complement their formal 
sexual health education in school. Rohit explained how having a 
biology teacher for a mother enabled a conducive environment for 
having normalized conversations about sex in the home. Recount-
ing his reactions to sexual health questions in newspaper columns 
while refecting on Video-1, Rohit said: 
“I never realized that other people may not have had 
that sort of normalization of these things. The kind of 
questions [that] were just out there...if you had any 
basic understanding of it, you wouldn’t even think of 
asking these sorts of dumb questions.” (Rohit, FGD-1) 
More often than not, however, conversations about sex were taboo 
in the home. This was also evident from our survey data, where 
fewer than 6% of respondents felt comfortable having ‘the talk’ 
with parents, sisters, and extended relatives, and not more than 13% 
were comfortable talking about it with their brothers. In our focus 
groups, several discussions touched on the taboo for men to discuss 
sex or sexual health with their parents. Bhanu recalled how “it is 
very weird. . . there was no formal way of even, like, getting to know 
about those things. Like, when you are young, especially in India, no 
one has to talk about the birds and the bees with you. . . your parents, 
or anyone in the family. At least most families do not. ” These taboos 
also extended to other family members, leaving our participants 
with few avenues for meaningful discussions around this topic. 
Sahil explained, “when I was in 8th [standard], my elder brother was 
in college, we had a very brief discussion over it. I guess he was also 
not comfortable to discuss with me and I was also very shy, like I 
should talk about it or not. So in extended families, even if I meet my 
relatives, we never had a discussion. Even now also. ” 
4.2.2 Learning from Peers during Adolescence.  With school and 
home environments failing to meet information needs around sex-
ual health, informal learning among one’s peer group served to 
fll these gaps. For 50.94% of our survey respondents, friends were 
the primary source of information, and 50% reported friends as the 
second most preferred confdants on such topics after their part-
ners (62.26%). Madhav described his interactions with older boys 
in his boarding school who shared their knowledge with him, with a refection that such conversations “does form like the foundation 
of. . . the crux of your knowledge. ” Explaining further, Madhav said: 
“So like it or not, most of my sexual education hap-
pened, kind of through osmosis (laughs). Kind of learn-
ing through whatever my school friends were learn-
ing. And it kind of became more like, self-learning 
over time, once I was out of school.” (Madhav, FGD-4) 
Learning about sexual health primarily from one’s peers meant 
that the authenticity and trustworthiness of the information were 
hard to establish. Further complicating these interactions, taboo 
around sexual health manifested itself as mockery and humor among 
one’s friend groups, discouraging open conversations even in those 
spaces. Our participants refected on how they and their friends 
resorted to using humor and judgment when these topics did come 
up in conversation. Raj noted how “[on] reaching a certain age you 
kind of realize that, you know, maybe I should know this. Maybe there 
is just a way for me to fnd this out. I do not need to discuss this with 
my friends. They might judge me for it. ” When such conversations 
did take place, many times out of necessity due to infrastructural 
constraints, the conversations themselves were problematic: 
“My teenage was spent in like very small town. So, 
mostly information used to come through friends 
[who] were like somewhat senior...not in a healthy 
way, but like, sort of making fun of [the problem] 
ki [that] ‘this is happening.’ [It] is like making fun 
like...real taboo of making fun of the sexual health.” 
(Sahil, FGD-5) 
Location and digital access also played a role in shaping access to 
sexual health literacies. Several of our participants from small towns 
had limited access to information growing up and had relied heavily 
on their peers in the absence of other sources. Our participants 
used humor to circumvent the taboo in these interactions, as Sahil 
describes. With little training in empathy and how to have healthy 
conversations on sexual health topics, conversations even within 
one’s friend group could result in harm as Arjun recounted: 
“I think [in] 9th class, one of my friends, while playing 
cricket, told me something like that [about his sexual 
health condition]. Because I had not experienced this 
thing, so I was unable to connect to what he was say-
ing. So he was [talking about] premature ejaculation, 
and he was asking me if this kind of things happened 
with [me] also. At the time, I did not have any expe-
rience of this. I was surprised...I remember making 
fun of him because of it later when he was in 12th 
class or [college] frst year.” (Arjun, FGD-2) 
Arjun’s refection also highlights how attitudes to talking about 
sexual health could shift over time. Like Arjun, several of our par-
ticipants mentioned being complicit in making fun of their peers 
for asking questions about sexual health during adolescence or in 
college. Their perspective changed over time, and many of them 
were able to have serious conversations on sexual health only as 
an adult, as we describe next. 
4.2.3 Conversations on Sexual Health as an Adult. The efects of 
internalizing the taboo and stigma attached to discourses about sex 
in growing years persisted well into adult life. Adolescence was aCHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Tuli, Ismail, and Bhat et al. 
time in our participants’ lives where “I probably completely stopped 
discussing it. And no one even asked me anything. ” As a result, adult 
conversations, especially ones intended to be open and circumvent 
taboo, required at least one party to be direct and forthcoming. 
Dilip, while refecting on the protagonist’s reaction to the doctor’s 
confrontation in Video-2, explained: “when the doctor put that, ‘yes, 
it is you who is having the problem, ’ he opened up. . . But yes, eventually, 
someone needs to approach [you frst]. ” Our participants noted how 
they looked for some form of social signals from their friends, both 
old and new, to understand if they could safely broach the topic. 
Even during our focus groups, a sense of social signaling prevailed: 
“My perception was, ‘there is [this] direct question,’ 
and I was just a bit unsure that I will be able to answer. 
But as they [fellow participants] answered it very 
well...I was more open to it.” (Dilip, FGD-4) 
The internalized taboo hampered the depth of conversations one 
could have with their near and dear ones. Participants described 
being more comfortable talking to strangers, and “maybe to a ther-
apist, yes. But maybe not to a closest friend” (Dev). One of the few 
avenues for learning about sexual health through direct conver-
sations came from our participants’ openness to talking to their 
partners or female friends about this topic. Noting that “it is a dif-
ferent dynamic,” our focus group discussions highlighted how, in 
adult life, the internalized taboos did not extend across genders as: 
“The whole talking thing is also diferent, because the 
gender is diferent. And you know, there is this taboo 
around ‘guys do not talk to other guys. ’ But somehow 
it is just easier to talk to a girl or maybe even your 
partner.” (Raghu, FGD-4) 
Our survey responses corroborated this perspective, showing that 
men were broadly more comfortable talking and learning about 
sexual health from the women in their lives. Many (62.26%) of our 
respondents were most comfortable discussing the topic with their 
partners, whereas for 37.74%, partners were the primary source 
of information. Additionally, 23.58% were comfortable having dis-
courses with close female friends. 27.36% were willing to speak to 
a medical professional irrespective of gender when seeking sexual 
health advice. 
4.2.4 Information-Seeking and Sensemaking. We now draw atten-
tion to the online information sources that supported our partic-
ipants’ sensemaking around sexual health. Several focus group 
participants and 70.75% of our survey respondents reported using 
Google as their frst resource in attempting to learn about any 
particular topic related to sexual health. This approach led them 
to discover and engage—both actively and passively—in online 
communities and fora around sexual health. Roughly a third of 
our survey respondents mentioned using online fora and other 
sources, such as “sexual educators on Instagram” (SP84), and “so-
cial media infuencers” (SP23), as one of their primary information 
sources. We found that online engagement spanned multiple plat-
forms, including messaging apps (WhatsApp–25.47% and Telegram– 
5.66%), forums (Reddit–21.70% and Quora–12.26%), social media 
pages (Instagram–14.15% and Facebook–5.66%), and telehealth apps 
(Practo–3.77%). Vikram, for example, reported fnding valuable in-
formation on subreddits like “AskBoys”, “AskMen”, and “SexAdvice” , where “essentially people who are not experienced in these areas [are] 
asking people who are supposedly [emphasis] having some experience. ” 
His statement refects the value of sharing personal experiences 
and engaging in collective sensemaking, but also points to concerns 
about the reliability and authenticity of information shared. 
We learned that privacy and anonymity were primary motivating 
factors for engaging “as these [online] spaces are hypothetically safe” 
(SP84). However, the potential for deanonymization served as a 
deterrent for some given that online engagements “are traceable” 
(SP22) or “some comedian/meme-maker might take a screenshot, and 
my identity could be revealed” (SP03). Our participants grappled 
with the conficts between discomfort talking about sexual health 
and desire for anonymity, with the need for more information: 
“Asking something online. . . I have never done that. So 
I searched something on Google, and there is already 
like a Reddit or Yahoo thread [for] that particular 
topic. So I go through that. . . But I do not think I have 
ever initiated a conversation online with, you know, 
strangers, about something...[I prefer] things super 
anonymous, which means then just like reading it up 
online, no one should know that, you know, that I am 
asking this and all of that.” (Bhanu, FGD-5) 
Like Bhanu, most survey respondents reported passive interaction 
via only reading or liking posts. Few had ever posted a message or 
participated in discussions online, and those who had done so infre-
quently. We also found that online fora could potentially play a role 
in helping participants who came from minoritized backgrounds 
fnd information that could meet their specifc needs. For instance, 
a Muslim survey respondent, SP51, shared that he “[used] Muslim 
NoFap, [because] although I am not an addict, I wanted to get rid of 
this disgusting activity, also to do dopamine detox and lead a healthier 
life. ” SP51’s response refects a negative attitude towards masturba-
tion, and a desire to change behavior. A forum primarily with other 
Muslims may have ofered him the understanding and support that 
he was seeking. Though this was a minority perspective in our data 
as apparent from Table 1, it highlights the role that religion may 
play in shaping sexual health information needs. We also found that 
the lack of vocabulary around sexual health—a consequence of the 
taboo around the subject—shaped online information-seeking prac-
tices. This shaped their online search behavior as well. For instance, 
the language used for search queries had to be framed carefully 
and could make a diference in receiving medically-relevant results 
or pornographic results: 
“Whenever I am able to actually articulate that ques-
tion in a smarter way, then I will just [Google] search. 
But if I think [it] will just like explode my search...I 
will just go to [incognito mode]. . . I think it’s like get-
ting the words, getting the trust, and getting like your 
own assurance that, ‘it’s fne’ or like, ‘this is normal, 
like, everyone is kind of okay about it.”’ (Raj, FGD-4) 
Participants in both our focus groups and surveys highlighted the 
need for authentic information. In the absence of reliable sources, 
pornography itself served as a source of information for 39.62% 
of our survey respondents. Though it served to fll fundamental 
gaps in sexual health literacy, multiple participants refected on 
the harms of consuming pornography as a learning resource. SahilNavigating Masculinity towards Intimate Wellbeing and Heterosexual Relationships CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
explained, “there is this false expectation from [by watching] the 
adult flms or the porn, for both male and female. . . It isn’t real, it 
is all fake, only for fun, we can’t have this in real life, this is all a 
show. If you want, you can see but not apply in your life. ” In general, 
we found that there were few spaces where our participants could 
get reliable information on sexual health, online or ofine. Avi, 
while refecting on Video-1, expressed his preference to get such 
information from an expert, “when you see an expert, you tend to 
trust them more than going on an online forum. ” However, fnding 
such experts could be challenging, and searching online was not 
enough to identify someone as “trustworthy” to discuss a stigma-
tized topic. Karan shared how “I need to be comfortable and able to 
trust the doctor extremely. Just like. . . when you talk to a psychologist, 
you know that you are in a safe space, there is some confdentiality. ” 
Though trust was largely discussed in terms of ofering reliable 
information, Karan’s comment reveals another component of being 
assured of privacy. Elaborating further, Rohan weighed on prefer-
ence for “a person whom I know personally, or is a trusted doctor, 
being recommended by a family/friend. ” 
Given the lack of spaces to discuss sexual health, our focus groups 
ofered a learning experience, as expressed by Raj,“this is probably 
the frst time I am having a discussion like this in a homogeneous 
setting. ” Our discussions led participants to further refect on ways 
to break the ice with their friends around these topics: 
“There are a lot of board games and party games. . . like 
variations of ‘Never Have I Ever,’ where a lot of this 
stuf comes [up]. That’s when you actually realize 
even within your friend circle, a lot of people have 
the same [experience]. . . ‘oh, wait!. . . This person has 
their fnger down. So it might be okay.’ And that’s a 
great way to break some of that ice.” (Raj, FGD-4) 
Such games could thus create opportunities to identify friends with 
whom one could have deeper conversations on sexual health. Our 
participants also refected on how they found the focus groups 
to be “informative,” “progressive,” and “eye-opening”, and ofered 
them a space to “refect on my own thoughts.” Sahil shared how 
this space, “helped me to really re-think about it [topic], how I can 
be more responsible about this. In my later stages, being a parent, 
how can I be more informative and helpful for my child. ” We further 
refect on how such spaces may be constructed in the discussion. 
4.3 Humor as a “Crutch” in Sexual Health 
Discourse 
We found that humor served both as an ice-breaker and the primary 
means of engagement on sexual health for men in their everyday 
lives—in conversations and through broadcast and mass media. Hu-
mor was a major theme across media viewed by our participants. 
Raj refected on how, growing up, one of the sources for learning 
about sexual health was sex comedies like “extremely dark, sleazy, 
B grade. . . obscure stuf, which would be the kind of stuf where your 
parents will say, ‘we are watching this, you go out [of the room]’. ” 
Dev who was based in India also shared how “I think many of us 
in our generation grew up watching American Pie, the movie series 
right? Even that and it is still just a thing of joke, any kind of talk 
regarding sex or sexual health. ” This also points to the role of con-
tent from other regions and cultures in shaping attitudes towards sex within the Indian cultural context, and the shared experiences 
across borders as a result of the internet and over-the-top streaming 
platforms such as Netfix and Amazon Prime. Despite the limita-
tions of such media, Rohan recognized the value of comedy in 
initiating conversations: 
“Although it [sex] is currently only being talked in the 
form of like, jokes or memes, but it is actually trying 
to bring up the topic, which is super important. And 
before, like [when] memes were not prevalent, it was 
not the case...comedy has some beneft to it, at least 
to start the conversation.” (Rohan, FGD-3) 
While acknowledging humor’s potential to work around taboos 
by making light of them and reducing barriers to engagement, our 
participants noted how humor on mass media predominantly tends 
to work within the boundaries of social acceptability and stops short 
of pushing hard against cultural norms. One of the participants, 
Raj, drew a comparison between our media probes and movies 
that predated them that had triggered conversations by breaking 
taboos and causing “. . . shock, but not for the comedy sense. ” He went 
on to stress that true normalization of conversation around taboo 
topics through humor should come from not just the shock factor 
but by “Not [making] it the joke, [but] making it like a part of the 
premise [and] the context as opposed to making it the punch line. ” As 
a positive example of media that deals with sexuality in this way, 
Dilip mentioned a British show on Netfix called Sex Education that 
was comedic and informative without making sex the punchline. 
Another challenge that our participants identifed with comedic 
content was the language that they used to talk about sexual health: 
“There was this whole period of sex comedies that 
would come out, and they would not educate you in 
any way. . . even the euphemisms are not that great. . . [but] 
they actually armed people with a way to talk about 
it without getting to the issue. So, I think it kind of 
damages that way.” (Raj, FGD-4) 
Raj highlights the practice of using euphemisms or double entendres 
in Hindi-language media, and suggests that this not only serves 
to perpetuate stereotypes but gives people the language to avoid 
speaking about sexual health. Our participants also pointed out 
the missed opportunities for media to instigate social change and 
leverage humor as a vehicle for learning how to overcome taboos, 
even when they tried to highlight harmful stereotypes: 
“So I have seen this video before, obviously, as a meme 
video, and I have laughed at it. One thing that I had not 
observed before was how, in that small span of time, 
they seem to touch upon two diferent issues. One is 
this whole taboo around dick size. . . then they also talk 
a little about some kind of erectile dysfunction. It did 
not seem like the point of the video was informative, 
given that how you just, in passing, talk about two 
diferent issues, and you build on neither of them...I 
observed it for the frst time, I guess because I am 
watching it in an academic context.” (Raghu, FGD-4) 
The above quote reveals our participants’ concerns that just 
bringing up stereotypes was not enough, and the desire to engage 
more deeply with stereotypes and sexual health concerns depicted.CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Tuli, Ismail, and Bhat et al. 
Our focus groups gave participants the space to refect on these 
more deeply. Madhav also described how using humor was used “as 
a crutch, rather than a portrayal of like reality. ” Media could promote 
problematic and potentially harmful perceptions: 
“It does seem kind of of-putting when they contex-
tualize these issues as content for satire/parody. So it 
was kind of a little crass. . . the way he [doctor] was 
communicating or trying to indicate that seemed a 
bit...not the best way.” (Madhav, FGD-4) 
Madhav went on to describe how his own experiences with doc-
tors had been positive, with concerns being handled sensitively. 
Sexual health was already taboo in the contexts within which our 
participants were situated, with infertility and other sexual health 
conditions being stigmatized. In such a cultural moment, depicting 
andrologists and other sexual health specialists as doctors equipped 
with “a pestle and mortar which made it feel like he was some sort 
of a pseudo scientist. . . [with a clinic] on the street, like in a dark cor-
ner”—even when done for comedic efect, could further discourage 
people from seeking professional support. 
4.4 “Tu mard hai! [You’re a man!]” 
Our fndings above pointed to how using humor and euphemisms 
to construct knowledge could reinforce taboos around sexual health. 
We next describe the stereotypes around masculinity that our partic-
ipants encountered, their struggle to connect the information they 
encountered online to their own experiences and determine what 
was “normal”, the insecurities and vulnerabilities that emerged due 
to these experiences, and the subsequent impact on relationships. 
4.4.1 Encountering Stereotypes around Masculinity. From adoles-
cence to adulthood, our participants constantly came up against 
stereotypes around “what it means to be a man”, explicitly and 
through euphemisms. The notions of masculinity they encountered 
were frequently tied to the ability to “perform” or ejaculate. Pankaj 
described how “idea of masculinity is this strong, tall, burly men 
who could. . . you just do not associate them with sexual problems. ” 
Rishi also pointed to cultural traditions that emphasized men as 
being responsible for the couple’s sexual satisfaction, which were 
also frequently depicted in Hindi media: “like, for suhag raat [the 
wedding night], there is tradition, right? Like, the groom is given the 
badaam [almond] milk, and then like, that is supposed to fortify them 
to be a good lover for the night, all of this stuf. The pressure is on 
them [men], not necessarily the couple. ” In light of this expectation, 
sexual health problems could be seen as a weakness. For instance, 
Video-2 was about erectile dysfunction experienced by a mafa don 
and was interpreted by Bhanu thus: 
“He is talking from a very like ‘oh! If I tell him that 
it is my problem, I may not be as dangerous as I am 
right now.’ You know, like, his ability to be aggressive, 
to be a man, is related to his ability to perform [during 
the act of sex].” (Bhanu, FGD-5) 
Representations of sex in media could thus emphasize a man’s 
role as a performer or aggressor rather than emphasizing intimacy 
or emotional connection. Bhanu pointed out the potential dehuman-
ization of men and the act of sex that resulted from such represen-
tations, “in many porns and adult flms, or what you can call it, the man is portrayed as a tool. It is like he just keeps on going when that 
is not the reality. In reality, it [losing erection] can happen. ” Another 
recurring ostensibly humorous trope our participants encountered 
was around the size of the penis. Stereotypes promoted through 
various information sources further shaped their perceptions of 
masculinity. The various stereotypes shared through memes, me-
dia, friends, and other information sources left our participants 
struggling to determine what was “normal.” Raj shared his struggle 
“because you know, you are. . . you do not. . . like, I think you do not 
have a yardstick of what is normal. When or what is even. . . what is 
even worth inquiring what is normal.” Such experiences and dif-
culties with determining what was normal could lead to fear and 
emotional distress. This was even more of a challenge for our par-
ticipants before they had access to mobile phones and the internet 
and were able to look up information online. We next highlight the 
vulnerabilities and insecurities our participants experienced. 
4.4.2 Insecurity and Vulnerability. Our participants highlighted 
how perceptions of masculinity and stereotypes could lead to inse-
curities, such as around one’s penis size or sexual performance. For 
instance, in response to Video-3, Dev personally connected with 
the depiction of a man’s sexual journey and how “dick measuring 
is literally a phase. ” Insecurities could also emerge from a fear of 
being judged, as pointed out by Sameer, “if you are good at it, and 
even if you are bad at it, you are going to be judged. ” Lack of infor-
mation about sexual health could also result in feelings of shame 
and discomfort in certain situations. Sameer shared a story with a 
fellow student at a school workshop: 
“He was getting frustrated when a very hot teacher 
was in our workshop. He said, ‘what is happening to 
me? I am not able to learn from the teacher, rather I am 
watching her in a sexual manner or something. . . in a 
bad way’ and all those things. He was surprised, ‘is 
it a disease, or is it happening with all of you?’ We 
tried to clear that it’s normal to feel like this about 
any girl or lady. But he was considering it a disease. 
He thought he would be free from this if he did much 
more spiritual activities...” (Sameer, FGD-2) 
Our participant (Sameer) and his friends found the individual’s 
concerns somewhat humorous and tried to address his fears and 
feelings of shame, but were likely ill-equipped to ofer support be-
yond sharing a sense of what was “normal” based on their own 
experiences. However, such experiences and the information shar-
ing that occurs around it can shape attitudes toward one’s and 
others’ bodies. The sense of lack of control over one’s body was 
also represented in Video-3, on which Arjun refected, “it is like 
that, sometimes your body wants what your body wants from your 
penis. You think that because of XYZ reason, it is not in my control. ” 
However, the information sources our participants reached out to 
for help rarely ofered reliable insight into how such situations 
could be handled. In another case, Vikram mentioned witnessing 
someone being trolled for posting a personal experience around 
sexual health on social media. Such instances led to several par-
ticipants stressing the need to sensitively handle an individual’s 
concerns rather than resorting to humor or ridicule.Navigating Masculinity towards Intimate Wellbeing and Heterosexual Relationships CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
4.4.3 Re-calibrating Expectations in Relationships. Despite receiv-
ing           
pressed that men were expected to be knowledgeable or experienced 
when entering a relationship, and to take the lead in the relation-
ship. Ram shared, “yeah, it is from a society’s point of view, like we 
are told that men should lead, even in dance men are to lead. So even 
in this, we should have experience and be leading. ” Such expectations 
persisted even if the man had never been in a relationship in the 
past as elaborated by Madhav: 
“Even if they have not had any meaningful sexual 
relationships in the past...you [will] come across as 
uncomfortable or awkward if you are [currently] in a 
relationship and you have not made any efort to learn 
more about sex...by yourself before you approach 
relationships.” (Madhav, FGD-4) 
Our focus groups revealed that the knowledge that our partic-
ipants had constructed based on stereotypes and societal expec-
tations was challenged when they had conversations on sexual 
health with women, either as friends or as a partner. They found 
themselves unlearning, as described by Dev, “with time and more 
experience, right, you get to know a little bit what actual normalcy 
is, right? (laughs). . . Why is this not happening, as I saw? And then 
again, you learn that there are some things that just do not happen 
as they show in porn. ” Our participants had to re-calibrate their 
expectations from relationships in such situations, and their prior 
misconceptions could potentially have severe and lasting physical 
and emotional trauma for them and their partners. Additionally, in 
the context we studied, getting married without having been in a 
previous relationship is anticipated. Video-4 presents the interplay 
of such misconceptions and cultural anticipations through a dia-
logue between a newly married couple. Here, the wife is trying to 
converse about her pleasure by referring to the sounds a woman 
made in a pornography video she had seen. Sharing his refection 
on the same, Ram elaborated: 
“I feel there are two aspects to this. Like Kiara [female 
protagonist], relating real life sex to porn, which is not 
reality, which is scripted, right? And the guy being 
uninformative, basically umm...this is an awkward 
situation. Because, like, they just got married, and the 
guy never had sex before.” (Ram, FGD-2) 
Our participants also noted that sexual dysfunction was also not 
depicted as a potential relationship challenge to be approached with 
their partner, but as something to be addressed with “this one pill 
that will fx everything” (Rishi). The media’s focus was also mainly 
on penetrative sex rather than other ways to satisfy one’s partner. 
Healthy communication between partners was seen as critical by 
all our participants to help set expectations for each other. Raj 
expressed, “when that communication does not happen. . . you are 
mostly just thinking—‘okay, how do I stay longer? how do I stay 
harder? or whatever. ’ That’s how you think. . . whereas when you start 
discussing, you realize, you could actually share it with the other 
person. And it could be fne.” Our participants pointed out missed 
opportunities to depict such communication in popular media, and 
stressed the need to move away from an individual to a collaborative 
approach to addressing sexual health concerns with one’s partner. little sex education in school or at home, our participants ex -4.4.4 Societal Pressure on Women to “Perform”. Our participants 
also refected on how though they felt the pressure to “perform,” 
the consequences of not performing frequently fell on the woman 
in the relationship. They cited several media sources where such 
gender diferentials were visible. The following example refects an 
association with infertility as a “weakness” as mentioned earlier, 
which could be reinforced by family or society: 
“I have seen a couple of movies...there is a husband, 
wife, and the husband’s parents are also staying with 
them...husband is telling that ‘I can’t perform’ and, 
his mom says, ‘Okay, don’t tell this to anyone. Okay!’ 
Then if the girl can’t deliver a baby, it’s the girl’s fault. 
Its always the [fault] in female...they do not discuss 
[question] men’s [sexual] health.” (Angad, FGD-5) 
Angad’s comment highlights how underplaying men’s sexual health 
could impact the relationship overall. The discussion with the 
mother depicts procreation as the goal of sex, not pleasure or deep-
ening the emotional connection with the partner. Sexual dysfunc-
tion was only seen as a concern in this case because no children 
resulted from the relationship. Along similar lines, another partici-
pant highlighted how such expectations could increase pressure on 
the woman, as represented in a media source he viewed where a 
woman’s mother advises her on how to “entice your husband, ” who 
seemed uninterested in sex, “but was homosexual, so he’s not able 
to, obviously consummate the marriage”. Bhanu further went on to 
explain, “I think there were problems related to sexuality, which was 
put on to women. Like, the problem was in the woman. She needed to 
be maybe a little more seductive, or enticing, you know. ” Bhanu’s com-
ment points not just to the burden of performing on the woman in 
a heterosexual relationship, but brings up additional concerns that 
may be experienced by men who were not heterosexual. Though 
Bhanu did not reveal his sexuality to the other participants in the 
FGD, his own experiences as a bisexual man may have shaped his 
sensitivity to this concern. 
5 DISCUSSION 
We frst unpack how cultivating sexual literacy is shaped by mas-
culinity, and how technology design can better support understand-
ing of sexual health while creating avenues for men to learn to be 
allies and supportive partners. We then expand on the role that hu-
mor might play in these eforts to sustain meaningful conversations 
on sexual health and wellbeing. Finally, we present our refections 
on conducting this study using media probes, to inform future re-
search that aims to “break the ice” when working on such highly 
stigmatized topics, by situating discussions in cultural settings that 
are familiar to the participants. 
5.1 Men, Masculinity, and Intimate 
Relationships 
Our participants’ experiences with intimate health and wellbeing 
were shaped by their exposure to expectations around masculinity, 
through information sources and social interactions with peers and 
family. Prior research has highlighted how taboos around sexual 
health among women can be traced to patriarchal structures that 
police women’s bodies [38, 39, 54, 83]. In the case of cisgender 
men’s sexual health, our research fnds that the taboos to someCHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Tuli, Ismail, and Bhat et al. 
extent emerged from expectations set by other men, particularly 
their peers and family members. Our participants were hesitant to 
participate in conversations with others of the same gender due 
to fear of being judged. Gendered online or ofine spaces were 
therefore not always perceived as being safe and conducive to shar-
ing knowledge and experiences, unlike in the case of women’s 
health where such communities have enabled sharing of deeply 
personal and emotional experiences (e.g. [50]). We found that men 
looked out for social signals to determine if they could have serious 
conversations on this topic with their peers. Technology could be 
designed for social translucence [27], by creating ways for men 
to fnd community or recognize that they are not alone in their 
experiences. For instance, existing fora on sexual health could in-
dicate the top topics that a user is interested in, or even highlight 
which users have similar interests. Many of our participants also 
struggled to articulate questions they had around sexual health 
because they had not learned the vocabulary and were used to 
euphemistic language. More HCI research is needed to understand 
the language used around men’s sexual health from a culturally 
situated perspective, which could then be leveraged in informa-
tion delivery. Potential sources could include online fora, social 
media campaigns, or even conversational agents, which have been 
efective in enabling learning on other taboo domains, including 
women’s health and wellbeing. Such channels could also help men 
refect on the language they use and make sense of the content 
provided, while preserving the privacy that they deeply value. 
We also found that men had been systematically excluded from 
channels for education on sexual health across genders, at home 
and in school. Taboos around the topic prevented co-learning with 
other genders in these settings. Despite this, many of our partici-
pants were more comfortable discussing sexual health with female 
friends or their partner as adults, than with other men. They were 
also keen on addressing the information gap they experienced and 
learning how to be allies and supportive partners. HCI research has 
only begun to explore ecological perspectives to intimate health 
and wellbeing [40, 66]. HCI researchers could create supportive 
environments where partners in heterosexual relationships can 
unlearn and learn together, while taking into consideration how 
their experiences are shaped by diferent societal expectations. For 
instance, Homewood et al. have previously studied how a fertil-
ity tracking device could shape a bedroom to become a space for 
partners to have conversations around intimacy, fertility, and in-
timacy [40]. Our research uncovered how humor could also play 
a role in enabling such conversations, by breaking the ice and en-
abling refection. One way to do this could be to take inspiration 
from provocative “party games” to facilitate conversations with the 
partner. We will next discuss the role of humor in more detail. 
5.2 Moving Beyond the Humor 
Humor and its prominent role in countering the taboos around 
men’s sexual health were evident in our participants’ experiences, 
media probes, and focus group discussions. In a cultural envi-
ronment where sexual health is a conversational taboo, humor— 
sometimes in the form of playful mockery—allowed men to discuss 
their sexual health with other men at various stages of their lives. 
Previous studies have also noted the disinhibiting efect of humor [89] as a potential tool to ‘diminish social awkwardness’[ 5] and en-
courage ‘positive interactions’ [86] around sexual and reproductive 
health. Although humor creates avenues for some form of informal 
and peer learning, it does so while upholding existing taboos [35]. 
Our data highlights how humor serves as an ice-breaker but falls 
short in catalyzing and sustaining meaningful conversations on 
taboo subjects. For instance, our participants brought up examples 
of how satire and humor in our media probes and jocular content 
(e.g., memes) they encounter in online spaces barely scratched the 
surface of meaningful engagement on men’s sexual health. Fur-
ther, our participants highlighted how humor that stops short of 
capitalizing on their educational potential could result in perpetu-
ating taboos or encouraging largely euphemistic language—to elicit 
laughs in conversations, or in disengagement [36]. We observed 
men heavily albeit passively engage with online fora to construct 
sexual health literacy. Thus, these spaces ofer information while 
serving as a locus for building vocabularies and forms of engage-
ment in public discourse. Consistent engagement in shallow humor 
around sexual health only minimizes the importance of deeper 
engagement around these topics. Therefore, future media, tech-
nologies, and spaces that leverage humor as ice-breakers need to 
move beyond humor and towards the deeper and more meaningful 
engagement to aid in dismantling taboos. 
There is signifcant scope for HCI to study the potential of humor 
to bring about long-term and meaningful change in conversations 
around taboo or uncomfortable topics. Prior research has inves-
tigated the role of humor in enabling conversations on women’s 
sexual health, in social interaction in people with intellectual disabil-
ities, and in discussions on institutional accountability [5, 17, 20]. 
In the case of men’s sexual health, a possible approach could be 
of working within the established social norms in men’s trusted 
social circles, where humor could be leveraged through games to 
initiate light-hearted discussions around sexual health while si-
multaneously serving as social signals for other individuals about 
one’s willingness to have deeper conversations. Along similar lines, 
movies and other mass media could both normalize discussions 
of sexual health with more direct language—providing men with 
better vocabulary on this topic—and also work towards flling the 
information gaps left by taboos. Learnings from prior research [88] 
could inform the design of technology interventions, like conversa-
tional agents, to support information-seeking practices among men, 
allowing for much of the social discomfort around peer learning 
to be obviated. However, we suggest a refective and critical ap-
proach to integrating humor as it can also be complicit in degrading 
women [65]. Though we did not encounter any instance of this in 
our study, some of the media that our participants consumed, such 
as sex comedies like American Pie [65], refect the need to guard 
against this possibility. 
5.3 Refections on Method 
Refecting on our experience of designing and conducting this study, 
we now present methodological takeaways towards careful engage-
ment on taboo topics. We designed our focus groups intending 
to nurture a third space [15, 16] for participants and researchers, 
taking inspiration from prior HCI orientations (e.g., [78])—adopting 
a feminist HCI approach [13, 69] to confront and disrupt the socialNavigating Masculinity towards Intimate Wellbeing and Heterosexual Relationships CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
and cultural structures, narratives, and constructs around sex, its 
education, and prevalent practices of acquiring literacies around 
sexual health and wellbeing. 
To build trust, we practiced self-disclosure [13] from the be-
ginning by being upfront about the nature of content participants 
would use (“depictions of men’s fertility in popular Hindi media. . . ”), 
and sharing our complete contact/background information. We 
struggled with participant recruitment through social media and 
even when we reached out within our professional and social circles. 
Many potential participants responded with appreciation, curios-
ity, and excitement but eventually withdrew as they did not feel 
comfortable participating on such topics. We encouraged partici-
pants to adopt pseudonyms but one participant still used a private 
channel to refect on his intimate experiences. Our backgrounds 
researching similar taboo topics was key for our participants as 
they “knew” these sessions would be “progressive” while “respect-
ing anonymity.” 
Learnings: We saw value in being explicit about seeking trust from 
participants at various levels. To be transparent to help participants 
make an informed choice, researchers can begin by including their 
bios refecting their experience with the taboo topics in question in 
the recruitment script. Participants might prefer one channel over 
another to share their refections. As study designers, we can ofer 
participants multiple options to express themselves while giving 
them the discretion to choose when and how. 
Taboo topics are accompanied by a lack of appropriate vocab-
ulary. Our media probes leveraged humor to ofer cultural eu-
phemisms and missing vocabulary, helping us set the tone and 
carefully but steadily push the boundaries of comfort around the 
language with every probe. We leveraged the shock factor from 
Video-1, which starts with the line—“my wife prefers to insert a ripe 
banana into her vagina instead of my penis” —to normalize the use 
of vocabulary that might otherwise be discomfting. Despite using 
phrases from the probes, our participants struggled to complete sen-
tences. Many of their sentences faded out with “whatever,” “umm. . . ,” 
“stuf and all,” “all of that,” “you know,” and “I mean. . . yea,” pointing 
to tacit understanding around the topic. Our choice of English for 
moderating sessions may have afected how participants expressed 
themselves. Our conversations might have been diferent, though 
not necessarily generative and comfortable if we had used a local 
language (see [82]). Lack of vocabulary and stigma can impact both 
researchers and participants. Given the positionality of moderators, 
they were equally vulnerable to discomfort and fear of creating 
stigmatized identities [46]. We struggled to probe as deeply as we 
aspired. Our participants used the beginning of the session to make 
sense of their experiences. Only slowly and towards the end did 
they begin to open up. 
Learnings: Leveraging locally relevant humor and playfulness could 
give a jumpstart to nurturing discussions on taboo topics. How-
ever, the language, euphemism, and humor are culturally situated, 
making it imperative to have an in-depth understanding of con-
text. Additionally, building vocabulary is a collective efort and 
takes time—pointing to the importance of engaging with the same 
participants over multiple sessions. 
Given the sensitive nature of our discussion, our sessions aimed 
to ofer a space for refection to researchers and participants alike, 
but we found that this also created room for introspection on both sides. Participants shared thoughts regarding their insecurities and 
awkwardness towards the topic, while researchers introspected 
on their own social conditioning that the study surfaced. The gen-
erative nature of this space allowed participants to unlearn some 
of their discomfort around talking about sex, see value in sexual 
literacy, among other topics. Nurturing a digital environment for 
having discourse on a taboo topic only partially caters to partic-
ipant care, as the physical space of the participant might not be 
a safe space to discuss such a stigmatized topic. For instance, a 
few potential participants requested to schedule the session dur-
ing their ‘not-at-home’ hours, a few attended this call from their 
balcony, and a few were whispering. The concerns were similar 
for the moderator whose parents were in an adjacent room during 
these sessions. 
Learnings: When researching taboo topics, the study design can 
be approached as an intervention. Our methods ofer a window 
to nudge participants into critical refection towards circumvent-
ing the taboos. While doing so, it is crucial to be mindful of the 
boundaries we might end up pushing, the trauma our interaction 
might unleash, and how it might afect both the participants and re-
searchers. One approach could be returning to the question—‘What 
disruption might X trigger for Y?’ Here, X could be a probe, vocab-
ulary, medium of engagement, setting, guiding questions, etc., and 
Y could include all those present, including researchers. 
6 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
We would like to draw attention to the fact that our fndings are 
culturally situated, and like any other qualitative research study, 
may not extend beyond the context of our choosing, which sought 
to include cisgender men of Indian origin with experiences of en-
gaging in heterosexual relationships. Our focus group participants 
were between the ages of 24 and 32, and none of them had children 
at the time of the study. It is possible that a participant set more 
diverse in age, or those with children or actively planning to have 
them, might have generated diferent discussions, such as around 
sex with the goal of conception. Other topics that were only tan-
gentially discussed by our participants and could be further studied 
were experiences with or understanding and concerns around sex-
ually transmitted diseases, issues of consent, diverse expressions 
of sexuality, and more. We also note that a mixed gender research 
team, with its set of positionalities, would shape the fndings in 
ways that diferent gender compositions might not. Despite such 
limitations, we posit that our study ofers considerable value to 
ongoing investigations in HCI that investigate topics surrounding 
gender equity and social justice. We trust that future work can 
build on our research to delve deeper on related topics, e.g., to 
take a dyadic and ecological approach to intimate relationships and 
wellbeing across genders. It would also be important to examine 
diferent intersections such as caste, class, race, among others, to 
see how these might shape information-seeking behaviors among 
men, drawing on prior feminist approaches as we do so [13, 52, 69]. 
7 CONCLUSION 
We present an understanding of how cisgender heterosexual men 
cultivate sexual literacy in a taboo context. Taking a qualitative 
approach, we used media probes to nurture a third space [15, 16] forCHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Tuli, Ismail, and Bhat et al. 
our participants to challenge and interrogate the cultural bound-
aries around the act of sex. We unpack how the construction of 
knowledge around sexual health is shaped by stigma stemming from 
masculinity and how the experiences of this knowledge construc-
tion impact men’s engagement in intimate relationships. Finally, 
taking inspiration from feminist HCI principles [13, 14] and refect-
ing on conducting this study, we share methodological takeaways 
for researching taboo topics. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We express gratitude to our participants who contributed valuable 
time and shared their experiences for this study. We are immensely 
grateful to the external reviewers, who sharpened our contribution 
with their feedback and critical comments. This research work was 
supported by NSF grant #2047726. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Teresa Almeida. 2015. Designing Intimate Wearables to Promote Preventative 
Health Care Practices. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International 
Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 
2015 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers (Osaka, Japan) (Ubi-
Comp/ISWC’15 Adjunct). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 659–662. 
[2] Teresa Almeida, Rob Comber, and Madeline Balaam. 2016. HCI and Intimate 
Care As an Agenda for Change in Women’s Health. In Proceedings of the 2016 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose, California, 
USA) (CHI ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2599–2611. 
[3] Teresa Almeida, Rob Comber, Patrick Olivier, and Madeline Balaam. 2014. Inti-
mate Care: Exploring ETextiles for Teaching Female Pelvic Fitness. In Proceedings 
of the 2014 Companion Publication on Designing Interactive Systems (Vancouver, 
BC, Canada) (DIS Companion ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 5–8. 
[4] Teresa Almeida, Rob Comber, Gavin Wood, Dean Saraf, and Madeline Balaam. 
2016. On Looking at the Vagina through Labella. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
1810–1821. 
[5] Teresa Almeida, Rob Comber, Gavin Wood, Dean Saraf, and Madeline Balaam. 
2016. On Looking at the Vagina through Labella. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
1810–1821. 
[6] Tawfq Ammari and Sarita Schoenebeck. 2015. Understanding and Supporting 
Fathers and Fatherhood on Social Media Sites. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual 
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Seoul, Republic of 
Korea) (CHI ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
1905–1914. 
[7] Tawfq Ammari and Sarita Schoenebeck. 2016. “Thanks for Your Interest in Our 
Facebook Group, but It’s Only for Dads”: Social Roles of Stay-at-Home Dads. In 
Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work 
&; Social Computing (San Francisco, California, USA) (CSCW ’16). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1363–1375. 
[8] Tawfq Ammari, Sarita Schoenebeck, and Silvia Lindtner. 2017. The Crafting of 
DIY Fatherhood. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work and Social Computing (Portland, Oregon, USA) (CSCW ’17). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1109–1122. 
[9] Karen Anne Cochrane, Kristina Mah, Anna Ståhl, Claudia Núñez Pacheco, Made-
line Balaam, Naseem Ahmadpour, and Lian Loke. 2022. Body Maps: A Generative 
Tool for Soma-Based Design. In Sixteenth International Conference on Tangi-
ble, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (Daejeon, Republic of Korea) (TEI ’22). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 38, 14 pages. 
[10] All India Bakchod. 2015. AIB : Man’s Best Friend. https://www.youtube.com/ 
watch?v=93oxfr6KfpA. Accessed on (2021/2/15). 
[11] Jefrey Bardzell, Shaowen Bardzell, and Lone Koefoed Hansen. 2015. Immodest 
Proposals: Research Through Design and Knowledge. In Proceedings of the 33rd 
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 2093–2102. 
[12] Jefrey Bardzell, Shaowen Bardzell, Amanda Lazar, and Norman Makoto Su. 2019. 
(Re-)Framing Menopause Experiences for HCI and Design. In Proceedings of the 
2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland 
Uk) (CHI ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 115, 13 pages. 
[13] Shaowen Bardzell. 2010. Feminist HCI: Taking Stock and Outlining an Agenda for 
Design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (Atlanta, Georgia, USA) (CHI ’10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1301–1310. [14] Shaowen Bardzell and Jefrey Bardzell. 2011. Towards a Feminist HCI Methodol-
ogy: Social Science, Feminism, and HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CHI ’11). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 675–684. 
[15] Homi K Bhabha. 2012. The location of culture. routledge, Oxfordshire, UK. 
[16] Homi K Bhabha and Jonathan Rutherford. 2006. Third space. Multitudes 26, 3 
(2006), 95–107. 
[17] Valeria Borsotti and Pernille Bjørn. 2022. Humor and Stereotypes in Computing: 
An Equity-Focused Approach to Institutional Accountability. Comput. Supported 
Coop. Work 31, 4 (dec 2022), 771–803. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-022-09440-9 
[18] Braun, V. and Clarke, V. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative 
Research in Psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101. 
[19] Nadia Campo Woytuk, Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard, Marianela Ciolf Felice, 
and Madeline Balaam. 2020. Touching and Being in Touch with the Menstruating 
Body. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 1–14. 
[20] Darren David Chadwick and Tracey Platt. 2018. Investigating humor in social 
interaction in people with intellectual disabilities: A systematic review of the 
literature. Frontiers in psychology 9 (2018), 1745. 
[21] Marianela Ciolf Felice, Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard, and Madeline Balaam. 
2021. Resisting the Medicalisation of Menopause: Reclaiming the Body through 
Design. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, Article 408, 16 pages. 
[22] Mayara Costa Figueiredo and Yunan Chen. 2021. Health Data in Fertility Care: An 
Ecological Perspective. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 204, 17 pages. 
[23] Lorraine Culley, Nicky Hudson, and Frances Rapport. 2007. Using focus groups 
with minority ethnic communities: Researching infertility in British South Asian 
communities. Qualitative Health Research 17, 1 (2007), 102–112. 
[24] Catherine D’Ignazio, Rebecca Michelson, Alexis Hope, Josephine Hoy, Jennifer 
Roberts, and Kate Krontiris. 2020. "The Personal is Political": Hackathons as 
Feminist Consciousness Raising. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 4, CSCW2, 
Article 150 (oct 2020), 23 pages. 
[25] Anna Eaglin and Shaowen Bardzell. 2011. Sex Toys and Designing for Sexual 
Wellness. In CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CHI EA ’11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1837–1842. 
[26] Daniel A. Epstein, Nicole B. Lee, Jennifer H. Kang, Elena Agapie, Jessica Schroeder, 
Laura R. Pina, James Fogarty, Julie A. Kientz, and Sean Munson. 2017. Examin-
ing Menstrual Tracking to Inform the Design of Personal Informatics Tools. In 
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6876–6888. 
[27] Thomas Erickson and Wendy A Kellogg. 2000. Social translucence: an approach to 
designing systems that support social processes. ACM transactions on computer-
human interaction (TOCHI) 7, 1 (2000), 59–83. 
[28] Ilker Etikan, Sulaiman Abubakar Musa, and Rukayya Sunusi Alkassim. 2016. 
Comparison of convenience sampling and purposive sampling. American journal 
of theoretical and applied statistics 5, 1 (2016), 1–4. 
[29] Hayley Evans, Udaya Lakshmi, Hue Watson, Azra Ismail, Andrew M. Sherrill, 
Neha Kumar, and Rosa I. Arriaga. 2020. Understanding the Care Ecologies of 
Veterans with PTSD. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–15. 
[30] Margaret Flemings, Shanzay Kazmi, Rachel Pak, and Orit Shaer. 2018. Crimson 
Wave: Shedding Light on Menstrual Health. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Inter-
national Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’18). 
ACM, Stockholm, Sweden, 343–348. 
[31] Sarah Fox, Noura Howell, Richmond Wong, and Franchesca Spektor. 2019. 
Vivewell: Speculating Near-Future Menstrual Tracking Through Current Data 
Practices. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 
(San Diego, CA, USA) (DIS ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 541–552. 
[32] Sarah E. Fox, Amanda Menking, Jordan Eschler, and Uba Backonja. 2020. Multiples 
Over Models: Interrogating the Past and Collectively Reimagining the Future of 
Menstrual Sensemaking. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 27, 4, Article 22 
(Sept. 2020), 24 pages. 
[33] Aakash Gautam, Chandani Shrestha, Deborah Tatar, and Steve Harrison. 2018. 
Social Photo-Elicitation: The Use of Communal Production of Meaning to Hear a 
Vulnerable Population. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2, CSCW, Article 56 
(nov 2018), 20 pages. 
[34] Bill Gaver, Tony Dunne, and Elena Pacenti. 1999. Design: Cultural Probes. Inter-
actions 6, 1 (jan 1999), 21–29. 
[35] S M Taiabul Haque, Pratyasha Saha, Muhammad Sajidur Rahman, and Syed Ishti-
aque Ahmed. 2019. Of Ulti, ’Hajano’, and "Matachetar Otanetak Datam": Exploring 
Local Practices of Exchanging Confdential and Sensitive Information in Urban 
Bangladesh. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 3, CSCW, Article 173 (nov 2019), 
22 pages.Navigating Masculinity towards Intimate Wellbeing and Heterosexual Relationships CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
[36] Karey Helms and Ylva Fernaeus. 2018. Humor in Design Fiction to Suspend 
Disbelief and Belief. In Proceedings of the 10th Nordic Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction (Oslo, Norway) (NordiCHI ’18). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 801–818. 
[37] Sarah Homewood. 2018. Designing for the Changing Body: A Feminist Ex-
ploration of Self-Tracking Technologies. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’18). ACM, Montreal 
QC, Canada, DC11:1–DC11:4. 
[38] Sarah Homewood. 2018. Reframing design problems within women’s health. In 
Design as a catalyst for change-DRS International Conference 2018, C Storni, K 
Leahy, M McMahon, P Lloyd, and E Bohemia (Eds.). Design Research Society, 
Limerick, Ireland, 507–517. 
[39] Sarah Homewood. 2019. Inaction As a Design Decision: Refections on Not 
Designing Self-Tracking Tools for Menopause. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) 
(CHI EA ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article alt17, 12 pages. 
[40] Sarah Homewood, Laurens Boer, and Anna Vallgårda. 2020. Designers in White 
Coats: Deploying Ovum, a Fertility Tracking Device. In Proceedings of the 2020 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) 
(CHI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. 
[41] Alexis Hope, Catherine D’Ignazio, Josephine Hoy, Rebecca Michelson, Jennifer 
Roberts, Kate Krontiris, and Ethan Zuckerman. 2019. Hackathons as Participatory 
Design: Iterating Feminist Utopias. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19). Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. 
[42] Minal Jain and Pradeep Yammiyavar. 2015. Game based learning tool seeking 
peer support for empowering adolescent girls in rural Assam. In Proceedings of 
the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children. ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 275–278. 
[43] Jonas Kjeldmand Jensen, Tawfq Ammari, and Pernille Bjørn. 2019. Into Scan-
dinavia: When Online Fatherhood Refects Societal Infrastructures. Proc. ACM 
Hum.-Comput. Interact. 3, GROUP, Article 231 (dec 2019), 21 pages. 
[44] Adam N Joinson, Carina Paine, Tom Buchanan, and Ulf-Dietrich Reips. 2008. 
Measuring self-disclosure online: Blurring and non-response to sensitive items 
in web-based surveys. Computers in Human Behavior 24, 5 (2008), 2158–2171. 
[45] Gopinaath Kannabiran, Alex A. Ahmed, Matthew Wood, Madeline Balaam, 
Joshua G. Tanenbaum, Shaowen Bardzell, and Jefrey Bardzell. 2018. Design 
for Sexual Wellbeing in HCI. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI EA ’18). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, Article W09, 7 pages. 
[46] Gopinaath Kannabiran, Jefrey Bardzell, and Shaowen Bardzell. 2011. How HCI 
Talks about Sexuality: Discursive Strategies, Blind Spots, and Opportunities for 
Future Research. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CHI ’11). Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 695–704. 
[47] Neha Kumar. 2016. Interviewing against the odds. In Innovative methods in media 
and communication research. Springer, London, UK, 207–220. 
[48] Neha Kumar, Naveena Karusala, Azra Ismail, and Anupriya Tuli. 2020. Taking 
the Long, Holistic, and Intersectional View to Women’s Wellbeing. ACM Trans. 
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 27, 4, Article 23 (July 2020), 32 pages. 
[49] Neha Kumar, Trevor Perrier, Michelle Desmond, Kiersten Israel-Ballard, Vikrant 
Kumar, Sudip Mahapatra, Anil Mishra, Shreya Agarwal, Rikin Gandhi, Pallavi 
Lal, and Richard Anderson. 2015. Projecting Health: Community-Led Video Edu-
cation for Maternal Health. In Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference 
on Information and Communication Technologies and Development (Singapore, 
Singapore) (ICTD ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, Article 17, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/2737856.2738023 
[50] Amanda Lazar, Norman Makoto Su, Jefrey Bardzell, and Shaowen Bardzell. 2019. 
Parting the Red Sea: Sociotechnical Systems and Lived Experiences of Menopause. 
In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 480, 16 pages. 
[51] Xiubo Liang, Jing Zhang, Jiayi Ma, Jiayu Yao, Weijia Lin, Zheliang Zhu, Yingying 
Ma, Fangtian Ying, Cheng Yao, Leijing Zhou, Preben Hansen, Yijun Zhao, and 
Guanyun Wang. 2022. Menstrual Monster: A Tangible Interactive Co-Educational 
Game Designed for Teenagers. In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI EA ’22). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 247, 7 pages. 
[52] Ann Light. 2011. HCI as Heterodoxy: Technologies of Identity and the Queering 
of Interaction with Computers. Interact. Comput. 23, 5 (sep 2011), 430–438. 
[53] Kai Lukof, Carol Moser, and Sarita Schoenebeck. 2017. Gender Norms and 
Attitudes about Childcare Activities Presented on Father Blogs. In Proceedings 
of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, 
Colorado, USA) (CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, 4966–4971. 
[54] Deborah Lupton. 2015. Quantifed sex: a critical analysis of sexual and reproduc-
tive self-tracking using apps. Culture, health & sexuality 17, 4 (2015), 440–453. 
[55] Juan F. Maestre, Patrycja Zdziarska, Aehong Min, Anna N. Baglione, Chia-Fang 
Chung, and Patrick C. Shih. 2021. Not Another Medication Adherence App: Critical Refections on Addressing Public HIV-related Stigma Through Design. 
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 4, CSCW3 (Jan 2021), 
262:1–262:28. https://doi.org/10.1145/3434171 
[56] Menstrupedia. 2017. Friendly guide to healthy periods. https://www. 
menstrupedia.com/. Accessed on (2017/07/19). 
[57] Mumbai Mirror. 2022. Ask the Sexpert. https://bit.ly/3Ux5rqz. Accessed on 
(2022/9/18). 
[58] Durba Mitra. 2020. Indian Sex Life: Sexuality and the Colonial Origins of Modern 
Social Thought. In Indian Sex Life: Sexuality and the Colonial Origins of Modern 
Social Thought. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. 
[59] Saskia SL Mol, Arnoud Arntz, Job FM Metsemakers, Geert-Jan Dinant, Pauline AP 
Vilters-Van Montfort, and J André Knottnerus. 2005. Symptoms of post-traumatic 
stress disorder after non-traumatic events: Evidence from an open population 
study. The British Journal of Psychiatry 186, 6 (2005), 494–499. 
[60] Maryam Mustafa, Kimia Tuz Zaman, Tallal Ahmad, Amna Batool, Masitah Ghaz-
ali, and Nova Ahmed. 2021. Religion and Women’s Intimate Health: Towards an 
Inclusive Approach to Healthcare. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 232, 13 pages. 
[61] Netfix. 2018. Lust Stories. https://www.netfix.com/title/80991033. Accessed on 
(2021/2/15). 
[62] World Health Organisation. 2021. Sexual Health. https://bit.ly/3QeUM0h. Ac-
cessed on (2021/2/15). 
[63] Dilisha Patel, Ann Blandford, Mark Warner, Jill Shawe, and Judith Stephenson. 
2019. "I Feel like Only Half a Man": Online Forums as a Resource for Finding a 
"New Normal" for Men Experiencing Fertility Issues. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. 
Interact. 3, CSCW, Article 82 (nov 2019), 20 pages. 
[64] Jessica A. Pater, Lauren E. Reining, Andrew D. Miller, Tammy Toscos, and Eliza-
beth D. Mynatt. 2019. "Notjustgirls": Exploring Male-Related Eating Disordered 
Content across Social Media Platforms. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. 
[65] Sharyn Pearce. 2006. Sex and the cinema: What American Pie teaches the young. 
Sex Education 6, 4 (2006), 367–376. 
[66] Trevor Perrier, Elizabeth K. Harrington, Keshet Ronen, Daniel Matemo, John 
Kinuthia, Grace John-Stewart, Richard Anderson, and Jennifer A. Unger. 2018. 
Male Partner Engagement in Family Planning SMS Conversations at Kenyan 
Health Clinics. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing 
and Sustainable Societies (Menlo Park and San Jose, CA, USA) (COMPASS ’18). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 3, 11 pages. 
[67] Ishkiran Rai, Dilisha Patel, and Aneesha Singh. 2022. "It’s Come around Way 
Too Quickly!" Can Technology Help Parents Provide Support during Menarche?. 
In Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Virtual Event, Australia) (DIS ’22). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1743–1757. 
[68] Afsaneh Razi, Karla Badillo-Urquiola, and Pamela J. Wisniewski. 2020. Let’s 
Talk about Sext: How Adolescents Seek Support and Advice about Their Online 
Sexual Experiences. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. 
[69] Jennifer A Rode. 2011. A theoretical agenda for feminist HCI. Interacting with 
Computers 23, 5 (2011), 393–400. 
[70] Jane Seymour, Gary Bellamy, Merryn Gott, Sam H Ahmedzai, and David Clark. 
2002. Using focus groups to explore older people’s attitudes to end of life care. 
Ageing & Society 22, 4 (2002), 517–526. 
[71] Makoto Shiraishi, Yoshihiro Sowa, and Naoki Inafuku. 2023. Long-term survey of 
sexual well-being after breast reconstruction using the BREAST-Q in the Japanese 
population. Asian Journal of Surgery 46, 1 (2023), 150–155. 
[72] Vaishali Sinha. 2017. Ask the Sexpert Movie. https://www.askthesexpertmovie. 
com/. Accessed on (2021/2/15). 
[73] Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard, Marianela Ciolf Felice, and Madeline Balaam. 
2021. Designing Menstrual Technologies with Adolescents. In Proceedings of the 
2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Yokohama, Japan) 
(CHI ’21). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 260, 14 pages. 
[74] Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard, Ozgun Kilic Afsar, Marianela Ciolf Felice, Nadia 
Campo Woytuk, and Madeline Balaam. 2020. Designing with Intimate Materials 
and Movements: Making "Menarche Bits". In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Design-
ing Interactive Systems Conference (Eindhoven, Netherlands) (DIS ’20). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 587–600. 
[75] Piya Sorcar, Benjamin Strauber, Prashant Loyalka, Neha Kumar, and Shelley 
Goldman. 2017. Sidestepping the Elephant in the Classroom: Using Culturally 
Localized Technology To Teach Around Taboos. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA) 
(CHI ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2792–2804. 
[76] Norman Makoto Su, Amanda Lazar, Jefrey Bardzell, and Shaowen Bardzell. 2019. 
Of dolls and men: Anticipating sexual intimacy with robots. ACM Transactions 
on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 26, 3 (2019), 1–35. 
[77] Giulia Tomasello and Teresa Almeida. 2020. Empowerment and Self-Care. In 
Crafting Anatomies: Archives, Dialogues, Fabrications, Amanda Briggs-GoodeCHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Tuli, Ismail, and Bhat et al. 
Katherine Townsend, Rhian Solomon (Ed.). London: Bloomsbury Visual Arts, 
London, United Kingdom, Chapter 9, 171–188. 
[78] Austin Toombs, Shad Gross, Shaowen Bardzell, and Jefrey Bardzell. 2017. 
From Empathy to Care: A Feminist Care Ethics Perspective on Long-Term Re-
searcher–Participant Relations. Interacting with Computers 29, 1 (2017), 45–57. 
[79] Bonnie Tran and Lee Na Choi. 2018. Menstrual Maze: A Toy Exploring Public 
Engagement in Menstrual Health Education. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal QC, Canada) 
(CHI EA ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6. 
[80] Anupriya Tuli, Shaan Chopra, Neha Kumar, and Pushpendra Singh. 2018. Learn-
ing from and with Menstrupedia: Towards Menstrual Health Education in India. 
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2, CSCW, Article 174 (Nov. 2018), 20 pages. 
[81] Anupriya Tuli, Shaan Chopra, Pushpendra Singh, and Neha Kumar. 2020. Men-
strual (Im)Mobilities and Safe Spaces. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–15. 
[82] Anupriya Tuli, Shruti Dalvi, Neha Kumar, and Pushpendra Singh. 2019. “It’s a 
Girl Thing”: Examining Challenges and Opportunities around Menstrual Health 
Education in India. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 26, 5, Article 29 (July 
2019), 24 pages. 
[83] Anupriya Tuli, Surbhi Singh, Rikita Narula, Neha Kumar, and Pushpendra Singh. 
2022. Rethinking Menstrual Trackers Towards Period-Positive Ecologies. In 
Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 283, 20 pages. 
[84] Amazone Prime Video. 2020. Mirzapur Season-2. https://bit.ly/3k2gzOM. Ac-
cessed on (2021/2/15). 
[85] Matthew Wood, Gavin Wood, and Madeline Balaam. 2015. Talk About Sex: 
Designing Games to Facilitate Healthy Discussions around Sex. In Proceedings 
of the 2015 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play (London, 
United Kingdom) (CHI PLAY ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 795–798. 
[86] Matthew Wood, Gavin Wood, and Madeline Balaam. 2017. Sex Talk: Designing 
for Sexual Health with Adolescents. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on 
Interaction Design and Children (Stanford, California, USA) (IDC ’17). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 137–147. 
[87] Matthew Wood, Gavin Wood, and Madeline Balaam. 2017. "They’re Just Tixel 
Pits, Man": Disputing the ’Reality’ of Virtual Reality Pornography through the 
Story Completion Method. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI ’17). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 5439–5451. 
[88] Qingxiao Zheng, Daniela M. Markazi, Yiliu Tang, and Yun Huang. 2021. "Pock-
etBot Is Like a Knock-On-the-Door!": Designing a Chatbot to Support Long-
Distance Relationships. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5, CSCW2, Article 445 
(oct 2021), 28 pages. 
[89] John B. Ziegler. 1998. Use of humour in medical teaching. Medical Teacher 20, 4 
(Jan 1998), 341–348.