Legal and Ethical Implications of Data Processing in Sex-Positive
Techno Parties: the case of ZusammenKommen
Zsofia Kenner
Kunst- und Kulturvereinsmeierei Hausgemacht
zsofia.kenner@hausgemacht.org
ABSTRACT
This paper describes how the organizers of large sex-positive par-
ties make use of digital systems to provide a safe and governed
space for their libertine guests. It describes the legal and ethical
implications of processing (including storing) person-identifying
and sensible type of data about the sexuality of individuals who
apply for entry into such parties. Based on the case of the so-called
ZusammenKommen party series in Vienna, it describes the tech-
nical and organizational safeguards used to assure the protection
of data and privacy of the guests. It further discusses which other
methods could be developed and deployed to increase even further
the privacy of its guests.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Security and privacy →Human and societal aspects of security
and privacy; Privacy protections; •Social and professional topics
→User characteristics; Gender.
KEYWORDS
sex-positivity, self-organisation, naïve digitalization, data protec-
tion, responsibility by design, GDPR, anonymity
ACM Reference Format:
Zsofia Kenner. 2023. Legal and Ethical Implications of Data Processing
in Sex-Positive Techno Parties: the case of ZusammenKommen. In 24th
Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research - Together
in the unstable world: Digital government and solidarity (DGO 2023), July
11–14, 2023, Gdańsk, Poland. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3598469.3598497
1 INTRODUCTION
Sex-positivity [ 14] is a construct from psychology coined by Wil-
helm Reich, a student of Sigmund Freud, who proposed that “sexual
expressions are healthy, pleasurable, and essential aspects of human
development” [ 19]. Sex-positive techno parties take this theory as
a point of departure to offer a safe space for non-binary people,
for women, and for queer people in general; to indulge in a hedo-
nistic experience within which they can express their gender and
sexuality openly in a prejudice-free setting [9, 26].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
DGO 2023, July 11–14, 2023, Gdańsk, Poland
©2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0837-4/23/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3598469.3598497With the number of participants ranging from several hundred
up to some two thousand or more guests, sex-positive parties come
in the form of typical techno parties, albeit with a libertine touch.
Usually, within designated areas of the party venue, the acting
out of individual sexuality and performing sexual acts publicly
is allowed, which is what sets such parties aside from traditional
techno parties. Parties such as those taking place at the KitKat club
[20] in Berlin, those by the Berlin-based artist collective Pornceptual
[13] or, in Vienna, the ZusammenKommen parties by Hausgemacht
[17,36] and others organized by the SOUL Verein are internationally
renowned.
To be able to offer such a safe space, the organizers apply a rig-
orous selection of guests by imposing a strict dress code policy,
forbidding the use of cameras, and assuring that the guests fit into
the community by appearance and character. On top of that, the
events by Hausgemacht and SOUL feature a so-called “awareness
team” that guards against violations of the community code during
the event; proactively intervening in situations of obvious harass-
ment and discomfort; whilst acting as a contact point for complaints
and assistance.
In the attempt to increase the quality of their sex-positive parties,
Hausgemacht introduced a stringent entry policy by making their
guests answer questions related to the event. Later, they requested
their guests to apply with a letter of motivation in which they
outlined their reasons why they would be a good fit for the party.
As time went by, they further required online mandatory event
registration. In it, prospective participants had to complete an online
questionnaire on rules of conduct, on one’s personality, and on
pertinent issues such as the understanding of consent. Furthermore,
they were required to submit a motivation letter.
A selection of the applicants with the highest compliance were
then invited to purchase a ticket to the event but could still be
rejected due to various reasons; rejection instances included turned
away at the door due to dress code violation, failure to correctly
respond to questions, improper behaviour, or other misconduct. Par-
ticipants could also be expelled from the event due to misbehaviour
at the event.
Initially, Hausgemacht used off-the-shelf tools provided by
Google to handle the online application process: the Google Forms
survey tool was used to provide the questionnaire by which appli-
cants conducted the online test, provided their name and e-mail
address, and submitted the motivation letter. The results and moti-
vation letters were then made available to a pool of reviewers using
the Google Drive cloud file storage as well as the Google Sheets
online spreadsheet editor; the reviewers assigned scores to the ap-
plications. A list of e-mail addresses with the accepted applicants
was then manually uploaded to Pretix [ 18] – an online platform
for handling event tickets, which enabled successful applicants to
purchase their tickets online.
251DGO 2023, July 11–14, 2023, Gdańsk, Poland Zsofia Kenner
This initial approach to digitalizing the application process in-
volved a lot of manual labour, making it hard to manage. Reviewers
were faced with a list of about 300-400 applications that had to be
manually reviewed by entering points into a spreadsheet file. All
applications were available to be inspected by the entire team, with
technical safeguards limited to controlling which group of people
would have full access to the data.
Such an approach to using digital tools to digitalize existing
processes can be deemed naïve digitalization . Easily accessible “of-
the-shelf” digital tools have been used in an attempt to enable
an improved selection process; without however considering the
legal and ethical requirements of the involved handling of per-
sonal data. Furthermore, such methods did not consider possible
disruptive potential of information systems if purposely designed
to address the specific needs of the workflows addressed. Such a
naïve approach to digitalization might well be a common challenge
for many non-professional organizations lacking professional staff.
Staff who could support the introduction or development of digital
systems for process innovation and/or transformation.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Chapter
2 shall provide an overview of the legal and ethical implications
pertinent to the storage and processing of the data collected dur-
ing the application process to a sex-positive party; chapter 3 shall
describe the case of a new system developed for Hausgemacht to
handle the application, selection, and admission processes to their
ZusammenKommen parties in a GDPR-compliant manner, while
introducing a novel review process inspired by blind peer review
customary in academia. Chapter 4 shall provide a summary of the
case, and an outlook on potential to further improve privacy in this
context.
By offering a case study [ 7,27] of the digitalization efforts of
Hausgemacht for its ZusammenKommen events, we present an ex-
treme case of guestlist-only sex-positive parties. This case study
provides insights into how not-for-profit organisations make ad-
vanced use of digital technology to effectively create self-governed
spaces for urban subcultures in large cities. The methodology used
to present this case follows the guidance of Flyvbjerg [ 7] on case
study research to present a digital transformation achieved by a
system designed following the design-science methodology [10].
Insights into this digitalization case inform on how self-
organized groups contribute to the development and evolution of
the public sphere with regards to avant-garde culture and the pro-
vision of self-governed spaces. The need for self-governed spaces
is not unique to this community but is rather a need shared across
a wide area of communities including political, cultural, and reli-
gious communities that need safe and governed public spaces with
specific treatment of personal data.
2 LEGAL AND ETHICAL REQUIREMENTS
Sex-positive parties are addressing a subculture that can be best
characterized as strongly liberal with regards to their sexuality,
often promiscuous in their sexual behaviour, which the crowd can
act out on such events. Organisers of such parties deploy various
selection mechanisms to assure that only participants with a fit-
ting vibe and good understanding of the community culture get
admitted. Individuals who had overstepped the personal borders ofother guests (by e.g., harassing or assaulting them in any way) in
the past would be prevented from admission to such events. The
selection process is thus deployed to compose a well-fitting crowd,
and to further educate and cultivate the community. Selection pro-
cesses range from simple motivation-letter style applications via
e-mail and selection on a first-come-first-served basis, to complex
processes involving multiple levels of assessment.
The toughest selection process (to the best of our knowledge)
is the one deployed by Hausgemacht for its ZusammenKommen
parties: a total of about 2.000 applicants, mostly (ca. 85%) aged
21-35, typically 40% male / 55% female / 5% non-binary or neutral,
compete for ca. 1.200-1.500 available tickets to “Vienna’s hottest
party” [ 17]. To compete, each applicant must take a randomized
multiple-choice test on the understanding of the community culture,
submit a motivation letter in which they describe why they would
be a good fit to the party, provide their age group, their gender, their
e-mail address, and their full official name. If selected, applicants
may purchase a ticket, but face a second round of selection at the
event itself. During the second round their adherence to the dress
code will be verified, further questions will be asked to make sure
that the person who shows up at the event is the one that has
completed the multiple-choice test.
2.1 Legal Requirements
In the jurisdictions of member states of the European Union (EU),
national law that must adhere to the regulations of the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [ 6] is the main source of norms
that regulate which data may or may not be processed, and how.
Directives in European Union law are one of the mechanisms of
normalization of legal requirements across the many legislations
of the EU [ 5] – for citizens of the EU this means effectively that
they can assume that their rights given by an EU directive will
be protected by each of the member states in accordance with the
provisions of the directive. (In Austria, the national implementation
of the GDPR is the Datenschutzgesetz .)
In the jargon of the GDPR, any natural person is a data subject ;
the main aim of the GDPR is to protect the rights of data subjects
by entitling them to obtain insight into and to exercise control over
the collection and processing of their personal data (i.e., data about
them). The term processing in this context refers to any imaginable
way of dealing with data, be it the collection of data, storage of
data, its retrieval, analysis, and so on. Processing of personal data
can be conducted by a controller , which is the agency (or natural
person) defining what personal data is processed and how, or by a
processor; which would be another party providing processing for
the controller.
The data which is collected through the application to sex-
positive events is data that reveals information about a natural
person’s sex life or sexual orientation. Article 9(1) of the GDPR is
mandating that such data must not be processed at all, unless the
individual gave their explicit consent (Art. 9(2)(a)), or the processing
is“carried out in the course of its legitimate activities with appropriate
safeguards” (Art. 9(2)(d)) by not-for-profit bodies “on condition that
the processing relates solely to the members or to former members of
the body or to persons who have regular contact with it in connection
with its purposes and that the personal data are not disclosed outside
252Legal and Ethical Implications of Data Processing in Sex-Positive Techno Parties: the case of ZusammenKommen DGO 2023, July 11–14, 2023, Gdańsk, Poland
that body without the consent of the data subjects” . In the case of
applying to sex-positive parties, either explicit consent is requested,
or applications occur as part of temporary memberships, which
enables the data controller to rely on the exemption provided in
Article 9(2)(d) of the GDPR.
Apart from the application and selection process, the collected
data is of interest for statistical inquiries and research purposes.
These are situations to which applicants to sex-positive parties
might not have consented explicitly, so the question arises whether
such processing is lawful or not? To ensure that data can be pro-
cessed for statistical and research purposes, the GDPR provides an
exemption with Article 9(2)(j) that permits processing of Article 9
data if appropriate technical and organisational safeguards can be
assured, as provisioned in Article 89(1); Staunton &al. [ 30] discuss
this “research exemption” in detail.
What then are safeguards in this context? The GDPR does not
precisely prescribe what safeguards must be deployed but advises to
usepseudonymisation (Art 4(5) GDPR) when possible. Pseudonymi-
sation is the processing of data in such a way that it cannot be
attributed to individuals without the use of additional information,
whereby such additional information should be stored separately.
Staunton &al. [ 30] emphasize, referring in part to the Article 29 Data
Protection Working Party [3] that “safeguards include but are not
confined to technical and organisational measures and pseudonymi-
sation”, but “must be dynamic and responsive to an evolving science”
in order to “respond to the multitude of legal, ethical and social
risks that are associated with the sharing of data”.
Whenever dealing with the processing of personal data in the
context of the GDPR, the principles of data processing (GDPR,
Chapter II) and the rights of the data subject (GDPR, Chapter III)
must be considered. The principles laid out by the GDPR are (Article
5):
•Lawfulness, Fairness, and Transparency : It should be clear to
data subjects that data about them is being processed and
to what extent; information on what is being processed and
how should be easy to understand and expressed in a clear
and plain language.
•Purpose Limitation : Data should be collected and processed
for specified and explicit purposes and not further processed
in a manner that is incompatible with those purposes. An
exemption to this principle is the further processing of data
for research, archiving, and statistics, in accordance with
Article 89(1).
•Data Minimisation : Processing of data must be limited to
what is necessary in relation to the purpose. Accordingly,
data for which there is no reason to be kept any longer, must
be deleted.
•Accuracy : Controllers must ensure that the data is accurate
and provide means for fast rectification of inaccurate data
where appropriate.
•Storage Limitation : Personal data should be kept in a form
that permits identification of data subjects for no longer than
necessary. (Personal data can be kept as long as needed for
research or statistics.)
•Integrity and Confidentiality : Protection against accidental
loss, destruction, or unlawful access to or use of personal
data.•Accountability : The controller must demonstrate compliance
with the mentioned principles and is responsible for their
adherence.
The principles of data processing concern the duties of the data
controller. The data subjects however have rights, which give them
some amount of control over the data about them. Such rights are:
•Right to Rectification : Data subjects may request rectification
of inaccurate personal data held on file by a data controller.
•Right to Erasure : Better known as the “right to be forgotten”,
this right entitles data subjects to demand deletion of data
about them if certain conditions are fulfilled.
•Right to Restriction of Processing : Under certain conditions,
the data subject may request restriction of processing of their
data.
•Right to Data Portability: If the data processing is based on
the data subjects’ consent and carried out by automated
means, the data subject should have the right to receive their
data in a structured, commonly used, and machine-readable
format and have the right to transmit those data to another
controller without hindrance.
Staunton & al. [ 30] point out that the set of rights provided by the
GDPR “does not seem to be at the data subject’s disposal in all cases”
when it comes to data being processed for research. According to
their finding, the “potential scope of research exemptions is so wide
that, if applied to its full extent, not only is a data subject’s consent
not necessary for the processing of personal data for research, but
also the data subject can be stripped from a number of rights and
others can be rendered ineffective, leaving the data subject with an
enforcement mechanism only.”
2.2 Ethical Requirements
There is more to data management than what the law mandates –
in fact, as Staunton & al. [ 30] stress, “the law is a minimal standard
to which researchers must comply with”. Whenever data about
individuals is being processed, ethical requirements should be taken
into consideration. This applies to any jurisdiction and is governed
by professional ethics to be applied by research organisations as
part of a community norm. An ethical approach to the processing of
person-related data was established long before the law governing
that topic was devised.
Staunton & al. (ibid.) point to the policies established by the
World Medical Association (WMA) to govern processing of data
in the context of medical research. Already in 1964, the WMA has
passed the Declaration of Helsinki [34] that mandates that partici-
pants in medical studies must be informed about the aims of the
research, its methods, sources of funding, possible conflict of in-
terest, benefits, risks, etc. The 2002 (2016) WMA Taipei Declaration
[35] aims to regulate the creation and use of health databases and
biobanks. Staunton & al. (ibid.) mention several other guidelines
issued by bodies such as the OECD, the UN, UNESCO, and the Coun-
cil of Europe. These guidelines have in common that they stress the
importance of consent, require a limitation of processing to only
what is necessary to achieve the objectives, to limit the scope of
data acquisition to the minimum required, and to give data subjects
the ability to withdraw their consent, if possible. At the same time,
all regulations and guidelines on data processing acknowledge that
253DGO 2023, July 11–14, 2023, Gdańsk, Poland Zsofia Kenner
rights of data subjects may need to be limited so that data can be
used and reused for research; in such case, appropriate safeguards
must be established.
Abiteboul & Stoyanovich [ 1] provide an overview of what it
means to be responsible and act ethically when designing systems
that process data about natural persons. The focus of their study is
on ethical requirements for artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms,
but the underlying ethics is the same for any system that processes
personal data. They stress that algorithms used to process data
should be transparent both in terms of disclosing how an algorithm
processes data, as well in terms of disclosing the structure and
content of the processed data. This way any data subject (or any
other stakeholder with legitimate interest in verifying the results
of the processing) can be sure that the data about them is being
treated fairly and moderately, not exceeding the scope of what has
been consented to.
From the specific perspective of algorithmic decision-making,
transparency of the data structure and transparency of the algo-
rithms applied is even more relevant, as it is required for the in-
terpretability of the results of an algorithmic decision. Abiteboul
& Stoyanovich (ibid.) define Interpretability as “surfacing the sta-
tistical properties of a dataset, the methodology that was used to
produce it, and, ultimately, substantiating its ‘fitness for use’ in
the context of a specific automated decision or task”. To achieve
algorithmic and data transparency, system designers must find
ways fit for the specific situation, taking the expectations of their
stakeholders into account.
It goes without saying that a further crucial concept in ethics
should be fairness . Fairness can be exercised along several dimen-
sions: when obtaining data, when storing it, when using it for the
purpose initially intended, when keeping it stored longer than the
initial phase, when reusing it, or when responding to requests of
third parties interested in reusing the data.
But what exactly does fairness mean and how can we achieve it?
Abiteboul & Stoyanovich (ibid.) emphasize that “fairness is a subjec-
tive, context-dependent and highly politicized concept” and hence
“a productive way to move forward in the data science context is to
develop methods that can be instrumented with different notions,
and that can support principled and transparent trade-offs between
these notions.” When designing systems for processing data, fair-
nessshould be part of system design, but the concrete details of the
mechanisms that will ensure fairness from an organisational as well
as technical perspective should be designed based on the context,
or, whenever possible, in such way, that the mechanism could easily
be adapted in an indefinite future to fit a changed understanding of
fairness that will be of relevance then. Systems for Dynamic Fine-
Grained Access Control [22,23] can be used to enable or support
access to data based on fine-grained access control policies that can
change through time without disrupting the system that stores or
otherwise processes the personal data.
3 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR A SYSTEM
FOR HANDLING APPLICATIONS TO
SEX-POSITIVE PARTIES
This section describes the design considerations for developing a
system for handling the application process to sex-positive parties.These processes are: (1) the application process, (2) the selection
process, (3) the ticket-purchase process, and (4) the admission pro-
cess. The objective was to design a system that would: process a
minimum of person-identifying data, deploy appropriate organiza-
tional and technical safeguards to provide maximum fairness and
adherence to the ethical and legal requirements. Ideally, a system
that processes sensitive personal data will tend to collect a min-
imum of data required (data minimization principle) and access
person-identifying data only if unavoidable. If there will be data
remaining which can be used to identify a natural person. Such
data would ideally be stored separately so that further processing
could be realized over pseudonymized data.
To source the functional requirements a variety of techniques
as outlined by Fricker &al. [ 8] have been utilized in the require-
ments engineering phase, namely: archeology [24] to understand
the functionality of the existing systems, observation [4] in order
to understand the usage processes, introspection [32] – “use of do-
main knowledge in combination with reflection and empathy to
base requirements on experience” [ 8], and interviews [2] with the
stakeholders involved previously at various stages of the process.
3.1 Functional Requirements of Systems for
Guest Admission
Following general functional requirements were identified during
the requirements engineering phase:
•The system should enable applicants to apply for admission
by taking an online test and submitting a letter of motivation.
•The system should enable blind peer-review of the submit-
ted letters of motivation through which applications would
receive a final score.
•The system should ensure that only applicants with a suffi-
ciently high score would receive an invitation to the event.
•A gender balance should be assured algorithmically.
•To recognize the previously accepted applicants at the club
door, each applicant was to be required to identify themselves
with an official ID containing the same name as provided
during the application process.
•Accepted guests were to be given the possibility to gain
knowledge on their acceptance status (accepted / rejected).
•Accepted guests would receive the possibility to purchase a
ticket online via the Pretix platform or buy it anonymously
at the box office.
•In case of misbehaviour admitted guests would be black-
listed.
Overall, the system was to be designed in a way as to enable
applications to the sex-positive parties without need for storage
of person-identifying data that could be disclosed during a hypo-
thetical attack or through insider theft. This was crucial in order to
contribute to building a safe space for individuals who would fear of
personal consequences if their name would appear in a data breach,
as such has happened during the 2015 Ashley Madison affair that
destroyed the families and careers of a very large number of people
and resulted in some cases of suicide [15].
254Legal and Ethical Implications of Data Processing in Sex-Positive Techno Parties: the case of ZusammenKommen DGO 2023, July 11–14, 2023, Gdańsk, Poland
3.2 Providing Anonymity
A specific research challenge that emerged was how to offer the
guests anonymity during the application, review, and selection
process.
Anonymity has been defined as “the state of being not identifiable
within a set of [ . . .] all possible subjects who might cause an action.
Therefore, a sender may be anonymous only within a set of potential
senders [ . . .] worldwide who may send messages from time to time”
[25]. To this end, an application to the sex-positive party would be
truly anonymous if and only if the sender could be offered a mode
in which no person-identifying data would need to be revealed to
the system or stored within, respectively.
For granting successful applicants’ admission to the event, some
person-identifying data which guests would demonstrate as means
of identification must be revealed by the applicant during the appli-
cation process. This data could either be some government identifier
(citizen number, social insurance number, passport number, identity
card number), or the name of the applicant. For sake of simplic-
ity the official name of the applicant was chosen as the requested
person-identifying data. Any applicant had thus to reveal their offi-
cial name to the system at time of registration, and, if successful, at
time of admission to prove possession of a valid ticket.
For the communication with the applicants, two approaches
were considered: a “pull-approach” where the applicants would be
required to periodically check the status of their application, and
a “push-approach” in which the applicants would be informed via
e-mail on major status updates. The pull-approach would enable ap-
plications without providing contact data of any kind; this approach
would prevent any digital traces of exchanged communication to
be generated, hence reducing the amount of hypothetically person-
identifying data provided by the applicant. The push-approach on
the other hand would require the applicants to provide an e-mail
address. The system would then automatically dispatch e-mails to
the applicants to confirm receipt of the application, or to inform
them of status updates. As this approach required the involvement
of a message transfer agent, digital traces of exchange messages
would be inevitably generated.
The requirement for the applicant to reveal their personal data
during registration posed a challenge to the design of the system.
This had to be designed in such a way that no identity-revealing
data could be leaked accidentally.
3.3 Technical and Organizational Safeguards
Technical safeguards that can be deployed are threefold:
1.use of cryptography to encrypt stored data as a way of
pseudonymisation
2.use of a system architecture that hides personal data from
users of the system
3.removing personal data from stored data once the personal
data is not required any more
A combination of all three technical options was considered for
the design of the system. Personal data that would be collected as
part of the application process was to be stored encrypted and hid-
den away from system users; involved in the process of reviewing
and approving the applications. Once storage of personal data was
not required any more, it would be automatically removed. Anydata that would be kept after removing the personal data would
thus become anonymized data.
Organizational safeguards in the context of processing personal
data are those measures by which an organization designs its pro-
cesses in such way that personal data is processed (stored, accessed,
etc.) in such way that the risk of a data breech is reduced to a
minimum or eliminated. It goes without saying that the best kept
secret is one that no one knows about – likewise, personal data is
protected best if not accessible to no one.
To reduce access to personal data to a minimum, the architecture
of the system had to be designed in such a way that all decisions by
humans were done facing anonymized data; while all communica-
tion with applicants was automated. Data that identified a natural
person (full name), or could potentially identify a person (e-mail
address) would be encrypted, and it would be decrypted only in-
memory to dispatch acceptance / rejection notifications, or to find
a guest on the guestlist based on a presented photo ID.
3.4 Case Study: A System for Managing
Applications and Admissions to
ZusammenKommen
Inspired by well-established sex-positive events of the club scene
in Berlin, the ZusammenKommen parties in Vienna began at a
small scale in May 2018 [ 17]. Their success attracted not only an
ever-growing crowd, but also senior professionals from domains
such as UI/UX design, system engineering & integration, visual
communications, and project management, who were ambitious
to contribute to a more sophisticated event series. This resulted
in a mature online presence (Figure 1), and the development of
an advanced, privacy-preserving, application process as described
below.
Figure 2 shows the multiple-choice test at the application page to
theZusammenKommen parties. An application to the event involved
composing a letter of motivation, taking a multiple-choice test,
providing gender and age-group, and submitting full name and
e-mail address.
Figure 3 shows a typical motivation letter, as presented for re-
viewers’ check; any person-identifying data has been removed, but
age-group, gender, as well as the applicant’s score on the multiple-
choice test were shown along with the text of the application. Re-
viewers received their batches in a set of five applications each via
e-mail and would award a score to an application by clicking on a
link. The simplicity of handling reviews was popular as reviewers
could scroll through review assignments and rate them instantly;
just as they would scroll through social media posts and react to
them.
From a technical perspective, the system was developed as a
client-server application using the open-source JavaScript library /
framework React [33] to develop the front-end (client) that would
run in the applicants’ Web browser; the back end (server) was de-
veloped using Microsoft .NET 6. To exchange data between the
front-end and back-end a ASP.NET Core 6 [ 21] REST API was ex-
posed using JSON for the structure of the exchanged messages;
HTTPS protocol was used over TLS to assure a securely encrypted
message exchange between client and server. Google Mail was used
255DGO 2023, July 11–14, 2023, Gdańsk, Poland Zsofia Kenner
Figure 1: Dress code explained on the ZusammenKommen web page.
as the message transfer agent through which all e-Mail commu-
nication with the applicants was conducted. The Pretix ticketing
platform [ 18] was integrated to transact the ticket purchases. Both
Google Mail and Pretix were chosen for their advanced API and
intuitive documentation.
The applications were stored on the server in the form of JSON
flat files. In such files, all data that could hypothetically identify
a person was concealed using cryptographic approaches. For the
protection of potentially person-identifying data, cryptographic
techniques such as cryptographic hash functions and symmetric
encryption were used.
3.4.1 Treatment of Person-Identifying Data. Cryptographic hash
functions [ 29] take arbitrary binary data as input and convert it
into a fixed-length sequence of bits – the digest, which can serve
to identify the input data. The same sequence of input data will
always produce the same digest value, while the smallest alteration
of the input data would result in an entirely different digest value.
The conversion of data into its digest happens only in one direction,
hence, whoever knows the data can always create the corresponding
digest, while by knowing only the digest one can never recreate
the corresponding data.For the system to ensure anonymity, it was considered to let
the Web browser of the applicant calculate a cryptographic hash
digest of a normalized version of the provided official name; only
this digest, not the official name itself, would then be sent to the
server. As it is virtually impossible to reconstruct the official name
from its digest value, this method would ensure anonymity of the
application.
In practice, however, this approach relied on several constraints
that rendered it impractical. First, the applicant would be required
to provide the full name exactly as stated on official documents –
from this name, the cryptographic hash digest would be calculated
and transferred to the server to be stored as part of the application.
A second cryptographic hash digest of the official name as presented
by the guest at the event would be calculated at the box office and
compared to the hash digest on file – a match would constitute a
proof that the initially provided name corresponds to the one in the
official document. However, the smallest spelling mistake such as a
missed diacritical sign or wrong spacing between parts of a name
would result in two unequal hash digests; this approach would be
unreasonably prone to errors to be applied in the given context.
256Legal and Ethical Implications of Data Processing in Sex-Positive Techno Parties: the case of ZusammenKommen DGO 2023, July 11–14, 2023, Gdańsk, Poland
Figure 2: Application to ZusammenKommen involves taking a multiple-choice test.
A way to implement this approach with reasonable chances of
success would be to demand the identification by machine-readable
travel documents in accordance with the ICAO Doc 9303 standard
[12]. Then, have the documents scanned at registration time, as
well as at the box office, to obtain the machine-readable normalized
official name from which the hash digest would be calculated. This,
however, would impose new technical and organizational concerns,
which were out of scope for the initial system design.
To store the full name on the server without running danger to
reveal it in case of a data breach we chose the use of symmetric-key
based encryption. More specifically, the AES encryption algorithm
with a 256-bit key was chosen to encrypt the person-identifying
data, with a key unique to each data record stored. The AES-256
algorithm is quantum-resistant [ 16,28], meaning that even if quan-
tum computers would readily be available any time soon, it would
be virtually impossible to apply a brute-force attack to find the key
required to reveal the thus encrypted person-identifying data.
All potentially person-identifying data, as well as the e-mail
address provided, were thus securely concealed and hence hid-
den away from potential external and internal perpetrators. These
precautions also applied to all human agents involved during thepeer-review and selection process. A perpetrator who would gain
access to the pool of applications would not be able to obtain the
person-identifying data contained in the records; unless they knew
each individual key used for encryption. Accordingly, any appli-
cation in this pool could belong to any given person in the world
with access to the Internet, and hence, is anonymous .
3.4.2 Communicating the Application Status. The system was im-
plemented in such a way as to give applicants an option to choose
whether to provide an e-mail address to be contacted regarding
updates to the application status. If the e-mail address was not pro-
vided, the applicants would have to regularly pull the status of their
application themselves by accessing a hyperlink. This hyperlink
was generated at the end of the application process. If they chose
to provide an e-mail address, they were free to provide an e-mail
address that did not hint at their name; hence the type of anonymity
desired could be controlled by the applicants themselves.
If provided, the e-mail address was stored as part of the encrypted
data and hence, a perpetrator with access to the pool of applica-
tions could not link an application to the provided e-mail address.
Nevertheless, a digital trace was inevitably generated and stored
as part of the outgoing messages stored at the Google Mail server.
257DGO 2023, July 11–14, 2023, Gdańsk, Poland Zsofia Kenner
Figure 3: To rate an application, reviewers simply click on a link received via e-mail. No person-identifying data is revealed to
reviewers at any stage.
The trace linked the provided e-mail addresses to the applications
via the unique ID; by which the applications were identified within
the system. A perpetrator with access to both the pool of outgoing
messages and to the pool of applications, could thus correlate the
e-mail addresses to the unencrypted parts of the applications. Both
pools, however, contained no person-identifying data. To mitigate
this issue, all outgoing messages were deleted after the event in
accordance with data minimization principles.
The individual applications were assigned a globally unique
identifier (GUID). The GUID allowed access throughout the process.
Based on the knowledge of their assigned GUID, the applicants
could obtain information on their application status at any time,
without the need to reveal any person-identifying data. Also, the
applications’ reviewers would conduct their reviews blindly. Only
the random GUID was revealed to them as the identifier of the
applications.
4 SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
This article described how the Viennese artist collective Haus-
gemacht digitalized ZusammenKommen, its sex-positive techno
party series. ZusammenKommen has been described as amongst
the largest sex-positive techno parties worldwide that is aimed at a
heterosexual audience. To be granted entry to the events, guestsmust apply by filling a multiple-choice test and submitting a brief
letter of motivation. Approximately 2.000 applicants apply to each
of the parties; around 1.300 – 1.500 get selected. A strict selection
procedure allows Hausgemacht to select a fitting crowd and assure
a gender ratio of 55% female, 5% non-binary or neutral, and up
to 40% male (the typical gender ratio at normal techno parties is
around 40% female vs. 60% male [11, 31]).
The application procedure to ZusammenKommen has been fully
digitalized by means of a purposely developed application system,
which integrates with the Pretix event ticket platform for the gener-
ation and sale of tickets, and Google Mail for communication. The
responses to the multiple-choice test are calculated automatically;
the review and scoring of the letters of motivation has been inspired
by the academic fully blind peer review process, so reviewers have
no means of knowing who the person that applied is.
The applications and the issued tickets are bound to the name of
the applicants. Accordingly, the full official name must be provided
by the guests during application, and an official document with the
same name must be presented at entry. This imposes the require-
ment to process person-identifying data. Through their letter of
motivation, but also through simply attending this kind of party, the
applicants reveal details about their sexuality and sexual life. The
bundle of thus collected data about the applicants is thus sensitive
258Legal and Ethical Implications of Data Processing in Sex-Positive Techno Parties: the case of ZusammenKommen DGO 2023, July 11–14, 2023, Gdańsk, Poland
personal data, which must be treated with special care and which
can be collected only with just cause.
Due to the peculiarity of the thus collected and processed data
special legal and ethical requirements apply, such as the principle
of data minimization (collect and process a minimum amount of
data), and the use of technical and organizational safeguards such
as encryption, pseudonymization, and anonymization. To this end,
this paper gave an overview over the ethical and legal requirements,
and the available technical and organizational safeguards. It also de-
scribed the design process of the system for handling the application
and entry to the event, which has been designed in such a way that
the applicants remain anonymous, and no person-identifying data
is revealed during the process. The use of quantum-safe encryption
as a technical safeguard, combined with a strict policy of access
to the technical systems created an environment where no data
would be revealed even if the infrastructure (server, communication
channels) would be compromised by attackers.
A key design challenge was to offer anonymity throughout the
entire application and selection process; to prevent disclosure of
person-identifying data in case of data theft by external or internal
perpetrators. An application to the event would be anonymous,
if and only if the applicant could be offered a mode in which no
person-identifying data would be associated with the individual
applications, nor could such association be established. Anonymity
was considered sufficiently achieved if no person-identifying data
could be revealed to human agents with access to the data stored
within the system.
To address the need for anonymity we first considered using
cryptographic hash functions to transform the official names pro-
vided by applicants into a hash digest from which the original data
could not be obtained. This method would require the applicant’s
official name to be provided twice – first by the applicant at the
application, a second time by the box office at ticket validation. This
method would provide anonymity even in a zero-trust environment
where the applicant would not need to trust the server, nor the
transmission channel, as the hash digest could be composed at
the client. However, this method was deemed impractical. Mainly
because already the smallest mistake in entering the data, such as
forgotten diacritical signs would render a false negative result. To
prevent disclosure of person-identifying data by a more practical
method, the person-identifying data was strongly encrypted using
AES-256 with a unique key for each application.
To enhance anonymity, we offered a mode in which no contact
details would be provided by the applicant. In this way, the system
could not contact the applicant to inform them about any applica-
tion status changes. This also meant that no digital traces would
be generated while sending messages to the applicant. Instead, the
applicant had to obtain the information on any status change by reg-
ularly consulting the system via a provided hyperlink. Applicants
who decided to submit their contact e-mail address were free to
choose an e-mail address that would not hint at their civil identity
and could thus assure anonymity by choice.
The digitalized application and review process enabled Haus-
gemacht to improve the quality of their parties with regards to
the composition of the guests. The selection process filter assured
that only committed, well-informed and fitting guests would be
admitted to the party.REFERENCES
[1]Abiteboul, S. and Stoyanovich, J. 2019. Transparency, Fairness, Data Protection,
Neutrality: Data Management Challenges in the Face of New Regulation. Journal
of Data and Information Quality . 11, 3 (Sep. 2019), 1–9. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
1145/3310231.
[2]Alvarez, R. and Urla, J. 2002. Tell me a good story: using narrative analysis to
examine information requirements interviews during an ERP implementation.
ACM SIGMIS Database: the DATABASE for Advances in Information Systems . 33, 1
(Feb. 2002), 38–52. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/504350.504357.
[3]Article 29 Data Protection Working Party 2011. Advice paper on special categories
of data (“sensitive data”) . Technical Report #Ref. Ares(2011)444105.
[4]Beyer, H.R. and Holtzblatt, K. 1995. Apprenticing with the customer. Communi-
cations of the ACM . 38, 5 (May 1995), 45–52. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/203356.
203365.
[5]Duina, F. 1997. Explaining Legal Implementation in the European Union. Inter-
national Journal of the Sociology of Law . 25, 2 (Jun. 1997), 155–179. DOI:https:
//doi.org/10.1006/ijsl.1997.0039.
[6]European Parliament and Council 2016. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons
with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such
data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC.
[7]Flyvbjerg, B. 2006. Five Misunderstandings About Case-Study Research.
Qualitative Inquiry . 12, 2 (Apr. 2006), 219–245. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/
1077800405284363.
[8]Fricker, S.A. et al. 2015. Requirements Engineering: Best Practice. Requirements
Engineering for Digital Health . S.A. Fricker et al. , eds. Springer International
Publishing. 25–46.
[9]Glick, E. 2000. Sex Positive: Feminism, Queer Theory, and the Politics of Trans-
gression. Feminist Review . 64, 1 (Apr. 2000), 19–45. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/
014177800338936.
[10] Hevner, A.R. et al. 2004. Design Science in Information Systems Research. Man-
agement Information Systems Quarterly . 28, 1 (2004), 6.
[11] Hunt, G. et al. 2009. Epidemiology meets cultural studies: Studying and under-
standing youth cultures, clubs and drugs. Addiction Research & Theory . 17, 6 (Jan.
2009), 601–621. DOI:https://doi.org/10.3109/16066350802245643.
[12] ICAO 2021. Doc 9303, Machine Readable Travel Documents Part 3 - Specifications
Common to all MRTDs. International Civil Aviation Organization.
[13] Inside Pornceptual: The Sex-Positive Party taking Berlin by Storm: 2018. https:
//boilerroom.tv/article/pornceptual. Accessed: 2022-03-07.
[14] Ivanski, C. and Kohut, T. 2017. Exploring definitions of sex positivity through
thematic analysis. The Canadian Journal of Human Sexuality . 26, 3 (Dec. 2017),
216–225. DOI:https://doi.org/10.3138/cjhs.2017-0017.
[15] Mansfield-Devine, S. 2015. The Ashley Madison affair. Network Security . 2015, 9
(Sep. 2015), 8–16. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/S1353-4858(15)30080-5.
[16] Mashatan, A. and Heintzman, D. 2021. The Complex Path to Quantum Resistance:
Is your organization prepared? Queue . 19, 2 (Apr. 2021), 65–92. DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1145/3466132.3466779.
[17] Matzinger, L. 2022. Nackte Nächte. Falter .
[18] Michel, R. 2021. pretix Documentation - Release 4.1.0.dev0.
[19] Mosher, C.M. 2017. Historical Perspectives of Sex Positivity: Contributing to a
New Paradigm Within Counseling Psychology. The Counseling Psychologist . 45, 4
(May 2017), 487–503. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/0011000017713755.
[20] Nächte im Kitkatclub - „Wenn man die Leute in normalen Klamotten rein-
lässt, wird nur das Normale passieren“: 2020. https://www.tagesspiegel.de/
berlin/naechte-im-kitkatclub-wenn-man-die-leute-in-normalen-klamotten-
reinlaesst-wird-nur-das-normale-passieren/25847548.html. Accessed: 2022-03-
07.
[21] .NET Foundation and Open-Source Community 2021. ASP.NET Core. .NET Foun-
dation.
[22] Paulin, A. 2019. Describing Legal Rules Through a System of Electronic Legal
Acts. Smart City Governance . Elsevier. 237–250.
[23] Paulin, A. and Thuemmler, C. 2016. Dynamic fine-grained access control in e-
Health using the secure SQL server system as an enabler of the Future Internet.
(Sep. 2016).
[24] Pérez-Castillo, R. 2017. Fundaments of Business Process Archeology. Organiza-
tional Culture and Behavior: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications . IGI
Global.
[25] Pfitzmann, A. and Köhntopp, M. 2001. Anonymity, Unobservability, and
Pseudonymity — A Proposal for Terminology. Designing Privacy Enhancing Tech-
nologies . H. Federrath, ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 1–9.
[26] Queen, C. and Comella, L. 2008. The Necessary Revolution: Sex-Positive Feminism
in the Post-Barnard Era. The Communication Review . 11, 3 (Sep. 2008), 274–291.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/10714420802306783.
[27] Ragin, C.C. and Becker, H.S. eds. 1992. What is a case? exploring the foundations
of social inquiry . Cambridge University Press.
259DGO 2023, July 11–14, 2023, Gdańsk, Poland Zsofia Kenner
[28] Rao, S. et al. 2017. The AES-256 cryptosystem resists quantum attacks. Int. J. Adv.
Res. Comput. Sci . 8, (2017), 404–408.
[29] Rogaway, P. and Shrimpton, T. 2004. Cryptographic Hash-Function Basics: Defi-
nitions, Implications, and Separations for Preimage Resistance, Second-Preimage
Resistance, and Collision Resistance. Fast Software Encryption . B. Roy and W.
Meier, eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 371–388.
[30] Staunton, C. et al. 2019. The GDPR and the research exemption: considerations
on the necessary safeguards for research biobanks. European Journal of Human
Genetics . 27, 8 (Aug. 2019), 1159–1167. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-
0386-5.
[31] Tossmann, P. et al. 2001. The Use of Drugs within the Techno Party Scene in
European Metropolitan Cities. European Addiction Research . 7, 1 (2001), 2–23.DOI:https://doi.org/10.1159/000050709.
[32] Vermersch, P. 2009. Describing the Practice of Introspection. Journal of Conscious-
ness Studies . 16, (Jan. 2009), 20–57.
[33] Walke, J. and Open-Source Community 2017. React. Meta Platforms Inc.
[34] WMA 1964. WMA Declaration of Helsinki - Ethical Principles for Medical Re-
search Involving Human Subjects.
[35] WMA 2002. WMA Declaration of Taipei on Ethical Considerations regarding
Health Databases and Biobanks.
[36] “Zusammen Kommen” - Sex-positive-Partys: Alles können, nichts müssen: 2020.
https://www.derstandard.at/story/2000114485472/sex-positive-partys-alles-
koennen-nichts-muessen. Accessed: 2022-03-07.
260