@INTERACTIONSMAG6   INTERACTIONS   MAY–JUNE 2021
BLOG@IXfor HCI research (see, e.g., [5] for 
an overview). And beyond this, as a 
young, cross-disciplinary field, HCI 
often expands the border of what can 
be talked about: Here, sexuality is a 
subject of design research, exploring 
technology through the lenses of sex 
toys [6] and kink [7], while others 
explore the role that sexuality 
could play in HCI research through 
workshops at top-level conferences 
[8]. But it can be argued that there is 
a comparable pattern here: Through 
these publications and projects, 
sexuality is framed at least implicitly 
as a prerogative of the young and able-
bodied.
Organized as part of the ACM 
Designing Interactive Systems 
conference in 2020, our workshop, 
“Don’t Blush: Aging, Sexuality & 
Design,” explored the (dis)comforts 
surrounding the potential role of 
technology in sexuality and intimacy 
in later life [1]. Bringing together 
researchers and practitioners from 
many disciplines, we particularly 
wanted to imagine speculative, 
positive futures of aging to help 
us visualize a sex-positive society. 
The workshop relied heavily on 
storytelling as a means to approach, 
communicate, and ground this 
sensitive topic in a manner that all felt 
comfortable with. In a first step, we 
used three stories—two descriptive 
of current scenarios (drawn from 
current practice), one speculative—
to kickstart the discussion and 
familiarize ourselves with the 
different themes this topic might 
encompass. The stories described 1) 
the experiences of a couple not able 
to find space together privately in a 
care home, 2) experiences of nursing 
staff with a “Mr. Carter” and his 
unsatisfied urges, and 3) the story of As you prepare for the 
Womanhood 2.0 
ceremony, you admire 
your silk robes, lined 
with sensors that create 
patterns of light in 
response to the heating 
and cooling of your body. Magna paid 
such attention to those lights. Sometimes 
more than I did. One evening after 
dinner, as we lounged about, him knitting 
and me not yet lost in the latest book. My 
robe must have lit up vivid as a southern 
sunset, pulsing through deep bruised 
purples and reds, melting into oranges. I 
looked up from my book just as he leaned 
in, a cold kiss greeting my warm neck. 
His hands, unusually cold but much 
welcomed, slid down my back, dripping 
wet. I closed my eyes, enjoying my body’s 
temperature dip, slowly returning to 
pleasant. Although the robe would have 
signaled the room’s temperature to cool, 
Magna was attentive, even playful, using 
ice cubes the old-fashioned way.
This excerpt is from a letter to 
a future self, a story written at a 
workshop held at DIS 2020 [1], where 
participants reframed and reimagined 
what intimacy might mean for the 
aging body and what role technology 
might play. Aging, and the changes 
to the body it brings, are often 
portrayed as something negative, a 
time of loss and fading away. Images 
of older bodies are rarely publicized 
or celebrated; in fact, old age is more 
often expressed through a—black 
and white—image of a hand placed 
on a shoulder. Although initiatives 
such as #nomorewrinklyhands try to 
make this lazy messaging visible as 
well as counter the stereotypes, the 
prevailing societal fear of growing and 
appearing older means that, deliberate 
or not, we tend to erase images of 
bodies that are aging. However, when we ignore the aging body, we also 
erase experiences such as menopause 
and the changes—positive and 
negative—that this period brings for 
people undergoing it. When ignoring 
the body, we erase intimate practices 
that are part of caregiving, including 
bathing, dressing, and close physical 
support. When ignoring the body, 
we erase experiences of intimacy and 
sexuality, and the important parts 
they play in our well-being.
Increasingly, HCI practitioners 
problematize and critique the way 
we, as a field, frame and address 
aging and the aging body [2]. This 
framing impacts the ways in which we 
configure and design new technologies 
that address or ignore the well-
being of older people [3]. While the 
community is growing in this respect, 
many research and design projects in 
HCI still steer away from intimacy 
and sexuality, choosing instead to 
focus on how older participants can 
gain satisfaction through family 
or civic life [4]. Although there is 
a healthy body of work in HCI on 
innovating surveillance technology 
or memory aids for older people, 
HCI has similarly balked in engaging 
with the “bodywork” that is also 
necessary in aged care, and which 
is often left to women carers, or to 
low-paid care workers. Elsewhere, 
however, intimacy is a recurring topic Utopian Futures for  
Sexuality, Aging, and Design
When ignoring the 
body, we erase 
experiences of intimacy 
and sexuality, and the 
important parts they 
play in our well-being.Britta Schulte,  Bauhaus Universität Weimar, Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard,  KTH Royal Institute of Technology,  
Rens Brankaert,  Eindhoven University of Technology, Kellie Morrissey,  University of LimerickThe Interactions  website (interactions.acm.org) hosts a stable of bloggers who share 
insights and observations on HCI, often challenging current practices. Each issue  
we’ll publish selected posts from some of the leading and emerging voices in the field.INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORGMAY–JUNE 2021   INTERACTIONS   7IMAGE BY MICHAEL -PREWETT / UNSPLASH
than answers. But we are convinced 
that these questions are useful for us 
as a field to move toward technologies 
that are truly supportive of the lived 
experience of older bodies. We tried 
to summarize some of them here to 
stimulate discussion within the field.
If we acknowledge that older 
adults might have or wish for an 
active sex life, what does that mean 
for the technologies we develop in 
this area? How can we ensure that 
the technologies we create support 
the joy, dignity, and privacy that we 
would allow everyone else? How do we 
develop research and design strategies 
that approach the question in suitable, 
sensitive, and satisfying ways?
If we acknowledge that good care in 
older age means caring for the body as 
well as ensuring people’s basic health 
and safety, how can we extend our 
understanding of intimacy, privacy, 
and dignity to improve and enrich 
often-ignored bodywork (bathing, 
dressing, and toileting)?
If we acknowledge the aging body a couple who asked the salesman of 
a robobutler company if the robot 
could provide support in the bedroom. 
These initial discussions were useful 
to find common ground and as a tool 
to develop a shared vocabulary on 
intimacy and sexuality. Participants 
were able to raise the topics important 
to them, outline blindspots, and 
relate the stories to their own areas 
of expertise, as well as to the things 
they found interesting from the other 
participants’ workshop submissions. 
After extensive discussions, smaller 
groups collaborated on writing a new 
story. The only direction provided was 
that the stories were to be optimistic, 
maybe even utopian, so that, instead 
of lamenting the status quo, we could 
develop visions of what we want to see.
The four resulting stories 
exceeded our expectations of what 
could be possible in such a short 
amount of time, as they were subtle, 
sensitive, and sensual accounts that 
allowed us to collectively think the 
“unthinkable.” Drawing on the 
variety of experiences the participants 
brought to the table, the stories 
covered a range of experiences, 
including: 1) enriching bodily 
experiences through lingerie that is 
suitable for people using incontinence 
pads, 2) sensitive, tailored sexual-
care-package subscriptions openly 
advertised in care homes, 3) love 
letters to the body and self-care 
rituals surrounding menarche and 
menopause, and 4) a sex-positive older 
blogger embraced by her family.
Even though these stories were 
planned out as utopian, they are 
inherently grounded in the everyday, 
the mundane, and the values of the 
writers. Drawing on the body as a 
focal point has enabled the authors 
of these stories to discuss societal changes not in the abstract, but rather 
on a personal, embodied level. Even 
though all stories describe deeply 
personal encounters, they also link 
to changes beyond these experiences, 
which are articulated through the 
artifacts that the stories’ protagonists 
use. The erotic lingerie that Jo—a 
nonbinary character—uses to change 
their body (image) is not only their 
own imagination: Jo also reflects how 
it has been shared widely through 
Instagram ads, showing that society 
has made space for conversations 
around desire, changing bodies, and 
incontinence to happen. The care 
home presented in story 2 (Figure 1) 
advertises the sexuality packages they 
developed openly, hinting at a whole 
history of conversations, changes, and 
decisions that took place beforehand. 
Through the family members, who are 
somewhat uncomfortable about the 
idea, we get a hint as to how far society 
has adapted to it.
As with every good workshop, “Don’t 
Blush” left us with more questions@INTERACTIONSMAG8   INTERACTIONS   MAY–JUNE 2021
BLOG@IXyou need is love: Current strategies of 
mediating intimate relationships through 
technology. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. 
Interact. 19 , 4 (Dec. 2012), 1–19; https:/ /
doi.org/10.1145/2395131.2395137
6. Bardzell, J. and Bardzell, S. Pleasure is 
your birthright: Digitally enabled designer 
sex toys as a case of third-wave HCI. Proc. 
of the 2011 Annual Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems.  ACM 
Press, New York, 2011, 257; https:/ /doi.
org/10.1145/1978942.1978979
7. Buttrick, L., Linehan, C., Kirman, B., 
and O’Hara, D. Fifty shades of CHI: 
The perverse and humiliating human-
computer relationship. Proc. of the 
Extended Abstracts of the 32nd annual 
ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems.  ACM Press, New 
York, 2014, 825–834; https:/ /doi.
org/10.1145/2559206.2578874
8. Kannabiran, G., Ahmed, A.A., Wood, 
M., Balaam, M., Tanenbaum, T.J., 
Bardzell, S., and Bardzell, J. Design 
for sexual wellbeing in HCI. Extended 
Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems.  
ACM, New York, 2018, 1–7; https:/ /doi.
org/10.1145/3170427.3170639
 Britta F. Schulte is a postdoc at Bauhaus 
Universität Weimar. Their work explores our 
relationships toward technologies for elderly 
care and the aging body, with a strong focus 
on intimacy and sexuality. In their work, they 
often use speculative and creative approaches 
such as storytelling and design fictions in 
many forms.
 →britta.schulte@uni-weimar.de
 Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard is an 
interaction designer and design researcher. 
Her work explores critical-feminist design of 
digital technologies for intimate health, such as 
menarche, menopause, and sexual pleasure. 
She is currently a postdoc in interaction design 
and digital women’s health at KTH Royal 
Institute of Technology, Stockholm.
 →mljso@kth.se
 Rens Brankaert is professor of health 
innovations and technology at Fontys University 
of Applied Sciences and assistant professor at 
Eindhoven University of Technology (TU/e). His 
work focuses around the design of technology, 
systems, and services for and with people 
living with dementia by using design research 
and living lab approaches.
 →r.g.a.brankaert@tue.nl
 Kellie Morrissey is a lecturer in design 
for health and well-being in the School of 
Design at the University of Limerick, Ireland. 
Her work focuses on experience-centered 
and phenomenological approaches to the 
co-design of digital technologies for and with 
marginalized participants.
 →Kellie.Morrissey@ul.ieand the changes it goes through, what 
directions does this open up for us 
to explore through our research and 
design work? How can we make space 
for the body in our research and keep 
an open dialogue about experiences, 
staying with the (dis)comfort of such 
conversations?
We hope to keep this conversation 
going and growing. All organizers, as 
well as most participants, came from 
a Western European perspective, 
with a strong focus on the U.K. and 
the Netherlands. Both the stories 
that inspired the work and those that 
came out of the workshop embody a 
certain understanding of sexuality 
and intimacy, as well as aging and 
caregiving. The majorities of the 
stories focus on a female perspective, 
which again mirrors the composition 
of the workshop participants. Even 
though not always explicitly, most 
stories further present a heterosexual 
outlook. While this is a limitation of 
the current work, it is also an explicit 
invitation to build on these stories, 
contradict them, and expand them. 
In addition, the experiences and 
wishes of people in their later lives 
themselves are missing here. We are 
planning to respond to this by using 
the stories developed in the workshop 
as conversation starters and other 
ways of qualitative and co-design 
research with aging people. We will further distill the insights and stories 
from the workshop into a zine to be 
shared within the academic and non-
academic audience. You can get a copy 
by contacting agesextech@brifrischu.
de. If you want to be part of this 
conversation, please get in touch or 
join the conversation at #agesextech.
Endnotes
1. Schulte, B.F., Morrissey, K., Juul 
Søndergaard, M.L., and Brankaert, R. 
Don’t blush: Sexuality, aging & design. 
Companion Publication of the 2020 ACM 
Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 
ACM, New York, 2020, 405–408; https:/ /
doi.org/10.1145/3393914.3395915
2. Kannabiran, G., Hoggan, E., and Hansen, 
L.K. Somehow they are never horny! 
Companion Publication of the 2020 ACM 
Designing Interactive Systems Conference.  
ACM, New York, 2020, 131–137; https:/ /
doi.org/10.1145/3393914.3395877
3. Vines, J., Pritchard, G., Wright, P., Olivier, 
P., and Brittain, K. An age-old problem: 
Examining the discourses of aging in 
HCI and strategies for future research. 
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human 
Interaction 22 , 1 (2015), 2; https:/ /doi.
org/10.1145/2696867
4. Reuter, A., Bartindale, T., Morrissey, K., 
Scharf, T., and Liddle, J. Older voices: 
Supporting community radio production 
for civic participation in later life. Proc. 
of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems.  ACM, 
New York, 2019, 1–13; https:/ /doi.
org/10.1145/3290605.3300664
5. Hassenzahl, M., Heidecker, S., Eckoldt, 
K., Diefenbach, S., and Hillmann, U. All 
DOI: /10.1145/3460204  COPYRIGHT HELD BY AUTHORSFigure 1. This illustration was developed alongside story 2, illustrating the different sex 
packages available in the fictional future care home.