111Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social
Media, and Justice Infrastructures
APARNA MOITRA, University of Toronto, Canada
SYED ISHTIAQUE AHMED, University of Toronto, Canada
PRIYANK CHANDRA, University of Toronto, Canada
India’s #MeToo movement began in late-2018, and was largely a platform for some privileged women sharing
their accounts of sexual harassment. Beyond issues of access to digital technology, our paper investigates why
various sections of India’s female and LGBTQ+ population chose not to engage with the #MeToo movement.
Focusing on experiences with sexual harassment, we conducted 44 qualitative interviews with middle-class
working women, feminist and queer activists, academics, and other stakeholders working against gender-based
violence, to understand their perspectives on #MeToo. Our paper explores why some survivors bypass the legal
infrastructure to speak out against sexual harassment using #MeToo, while others choose not to participate
despite having access to social media platforms. Using the lens of infrastructure, we outline the imbrication
of social media movements with existing social norms and legal infrastructures. Further, we highlight how
infrastructural politics are connected to patriarchy, colonialism, caste, class, and gender struggles.
CCS Concepts: •Human-centered computing →Empirical studies in collaborative and social com-
puting .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: feminism; LGBTQ+; intersectionality; sexual harassment; justice; infras-
tructure
ACM Reference Format:
Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, and Priyank Chandra. 2021. Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual
Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5, CSCW1, Article 111
(April 2021), 34 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3449185
1 INTRODUCTION
In October 2017, an unusual global feminist movement started over various social media platforms,
where using the hashtag #MeToo (or some variants of it), women across the world publicly shared
their untold stories of being sexually harassed [ 121,154]. Before this, a few other hashtags were
also used for similar purposes, including #MyHarveyWeinstein, #YouOkSis, and #SurvivorPrivilege.
However, none of them could create such a massive movement on social media. While Tarana
Burke, an African American social activist from the United States coined the phrase “Me Too” in
2006 when she launched a grassroots level campaign for “empowering through empathy” for the
women of color within her community [ 121], it gained prominence only when several women from
Hollywood came out with their stories of sexual harassment [120, 154].
Authors’ addresses: Aparna Moitra, aparna.moitra@utoronto.ca, Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada; Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, ishtiaque@cs.toronto.edu, Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada; Priyank Chandra, priyank.chandra@utoronto.ca, Faculty of Information, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
2573-0142/2021/4-ART111 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3449185
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:2 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
Sexual harassment is a serious offense that causes several negative impacts on the survivor/victims’
physical, psychological, and social health [45, 73]. Unfortunately, the prevalence of sexual harass-
ment is very high across the globe with women being the principal victims [ 51,93]. The #MeToo
movement on social media has been considered revolutionary as millions of women across the
globe used these platforms available at their disposal to share their experiences and make their
voices heard [ 139]. Such voluntary and spontaneous participation of women in breaking down a
silence that had long been suppressing them was unprecedented in history.
Independent surveys of experts have ranked India as the most dangerous country for women
due to a high risk of sexual violence [ 103], with national statistics in 2016 revealing a total of
27,344 cases of sexual harassment nationwide. A 2014 study by Oxfam India of formal and informal
workers in 8 different cities reported that 17% women were sexually harassed at work, the most
vulnerable being the female labourers (29%) and domestic workers (23%) [ 40]. Other statistics
reported harassment as 88% in the Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) sector and 57% in the
health sector [ 32]. However, owing to the taboo surrounding sex and sexual harassment in the
conservative Indian society, these statistics are grossly under-reported.
The global #MeToo movement of October 2017 did not gain much traction in the Indian sub-
continent [ 71,85] and was shortly followed by a crowd-sourced list of (alleged) sexual predators
in Indian academia on Facebook, known as the List of Sexual Harassers in Academia (LoSHA)
[17,118], which also failed to create ripples beyond the academic circles. The #MeToo that took
India by storm is reported to have begun in late 2018 when one of the former actresses working in
the Hindi film industry spoke up about being harassed by a male co-actor which then snowballed
to television industry, journalism, corporate and other workplaces [ 59,71,74]. Even though India
has a dedicated law that recognizes sexual harassment of women at workplace as a violation to
the fundamental rights of a woman to life, equality and work with dignity [ 2], yet the survivors
ditching the due process in favour of online feminist movements such as #MeToo highlights serious
issues with the formal justice seeking infrastructures [79].
The #MeToo movement in India has mostly witnessed privileged and elite women speaking
out, with a significant lack of stories from general middle-class women; women belonging to poor
socio-economic strata (such as unorganized sector workers and domestic workers); Dalit, Bahujan,
and Aadivasi women; and the queer community [ 1,17,89,120,123]. While the non-participation of
those belonging to the poor socio-economic strata could largely be attributed to their lack of access
to digital technology [ 56], questions still remain about those women and LGBTQ+ individuals1
who in spite of being regular users of social media platforms chose not to engage with it.
CSCW research has increasingly been looking at issues of justice and equity related to the design
and use of socio-technical systems, especially when actors and their struggles are rendered invisible
[65,115,132]. Feminist [ 18] and intersectional [ 35,43,100,114] approaches to computing have also
begun to critically examine how gender, race, sexual orientation, and power shape technologies.
Our paper builds on these themes to discuss the dynamics of online feminist movements playing
out on social media in the relatively less studied context of Global South, more specifically in a
diverse country like India.
Our research question was to understand why some survivors bypassed the legal infrastructure
to speak out against sexual harassment on social media during India’s #MeToo movement, while
others did not participate in the movement despite having access and ability to participate on social
media platforms (which we conceptualize as digital infrastructural routes of seeking justice in our
work). We interviewed 44 middle-class working women, feminist and LGBTQ+ activists, academics,
1More specifically non-binary, gender queer, or men identifying as gay who lack representation under the current law on
sexual harassment
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:3
and other stakeholders working against gender-based violence. Our interviewees represented a
diverse set of ethnic identities of India. Our findings, however, provided a complicated picture of
power dynamics at play.
In this paper we demonstrate how nuanced heteronormative, patriarchal, classificatory and bu-
reaucratic biases in the legal infrastructures, influenced by the social norms, deter victim/survivors
from taking the ‘due process’ route for seeking justice for sexual harassment. We then show how
the #MeToo movement emerged as a symptom of dissatisfaction with the due process and a push
back against existing biases to disrupt the status quo. However, many participants reported their
inability to align with the ‘Western’ values and politics of #MeToo owing to its lack of account-
ability and appropriation by a certain class of privileged women. Survivors, especially those at the
marginalized intersections of class, caste, gender and sexual orientation felt alienated as lack of
cultural backing and support systems further prevented them from utilizing such digital justice
infrastructures for speaking out and seeking justice. Our contributions from this paper are threefold.
First, using infrastructural analysis [ 26] we share in-depth insights about the imbrication [ 124] of
digital infrastructural routes of seeking justice with legal infrastructure and social norms around
sexual harassment in India. We demonstrate how the dis-alignments within this imbrication pave
way for seamful spaces [ 145] that provide differential opportunities to some (relatively privileged)
actors to push back against the challenges and exclusions to have their voices heard within and
across the seams, and as a consequence shape social computing practices to act on social justice
issues. Second, our work speaks of the torque and residuality experienced by individuals living
with marginalized intersectional identities (in terms of caste, class, gender, sexual orientation)
that further weakens their efforts to push back across these seams. Finally, we demonstrate that
infrastructure cannot just be read off of its design and material configuration. It has to be read
through the social practices of use that are mediated by social structures around the constructs of
patriarchy, colonialism, caste, class and gender struggles.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Infrastructures for Seeking Justice
Star [ 130] conceives infrastructures as relational and ecological and calls for their study to un-
derstand the issues of “distributional justice,” i.e., who the infrastructures exclude and silence.
Dominant systems of knowledge and assumption with values based on purity and ‘naturalness’
may render lived experiences marginal, invisible, or unthinkable within an infrastructure [ 9], e.g.,
a transgender person who does not fit the cultural and gender dichotomies [ 131,134]. However,
infrastructures never operate in a vacuum. They always act in reference to arrangements, tools,
and material objects and often inherit the exclusions from the inertia of their installed base [ 26].
The installed base serves as the foundation for change and development and can be both enabling
and constraining [ 3]. Various scholars [ 9,26] acknowledge that systems of all kinds and levels may
break down. They assert that no classification system can ever fully satisfy the requirements of
completeness, consistency, and division into mutually exclusive categories, and therefore should be
analysed according to its points of tension, friction, and breakdown. Ahmed, et al. [ 9] also argue
that we should consider the restrictions to accessing operative infrastructures due to barriers of
cost, literacy, availability and social standing vis-á-vis socio-cultural norms.
Pipek and Wulf [ 98] have coined the term ‘infrastructuring’ to describe the process of reworking
settled systems and procedures to align with digital infrastructures to accommodate breakdown,
innovation, and change, across multiple “points of infrastructure” or seams [ 145]. This “uneven
arrangement of heterogeneous things that changes over time and across places as the whole is
edited/rearranged” is defined as an imbrication [ 124]. Often, an imbrication is a messy overlap of
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:4 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
socio-technical systems, creating seamful spaces in which actors work creatively and strategically
to align themselves to have their voices heard within and across the seams [ 124,145]. This overlap
can create new modes of access, support and value leading to a creative re-appropriation of
infrastructures [ 9,60,127]. In recent literature, scholars have re-imagined infrastructures in different
creative and more generative ways [ 41,65,115]. They believe that infrastructure is not set in
stone but is constantly changing and growing in subtle and fluid ways. Bowker [ 25] suggests an
infrastructural inversion approach to scrutinize technologies and arrangements for interdependence
of technical networks and standards as well as for their politics of knowledge production [ 26,
65]. Exposing the “taken for granted” in any formal system, residual categories exist in every
classification scheme [ 26]. Star and Bowker [ 131] characterize them as too complicated to describe
due to the confused ‘grayness’ of their experiences. System breakdown occurs as these categories
are unable to fit into an existing schema, rendering their experiences invisible and ‘torqued. ’ Torque
is an analytic resource to describe the lived experience of excluded users of an infrastructure-in-use
[124], and is defined as situations where the multiple identities of a body cannot be aligned with
the classification system [ 26]. Friction is also experienced in the use of infrastructures and is
conceptualized as exposing diverging values embedded in infrastructure or values that have been
left aside during its design [ 68,143]. Korn and Voida [ 68] argue that friction can provoke people
to question conventional norms and values as well as actively pursue change on behalf of their
communities. Collaborative forms of infrastructure use and engagement eventually help individuals
navigate the conditions of residuality [9].
Infrastructural inversion exposes the norms and practices that perpetuate disempowering biases
within various socio-technical systems such as legal infrastructures and technologies. In recent
CSCW literature, besides an Actor-Network Theory (ANT) driven infrastructural analysis, scholars
have focused on a ‘fluid,’ ‘moving,’ and ‘in progress’ version of infrastructure that has shifted the
associated discourse toward a more progressive analysis. For instance, Soden and Kauffman [ 126]
advocate for the development of a richer conceptual apparatus for describing the ways in which
our socio-technical imaginations shape information infrastructures, and vice versa. In a similar
vein, using a discourse-based analysis, Semaan [ 115] demonstrates how LGBTQ individuals in
the United States are adopting and re-appropriating digital infrastructures by writing their own
community narratives — using transformative fandom — to counter and push back against everyday
systemic marginalization (e.g. homophobia), that has become internalized in the infrastructures
(e.g. media) that permeate our society. This intersects with feminist perspectives to computing that
highlight the sexist and gendered nature of socio-technical infrastructures leading to invisibility
and silence in the face of oppression and violence. Feminist scholars have long been advocating to
bring changes to the narrative to initiate a change to that infrastructure. Further, borrowing from
the urban design concept of ‘desire lines’, it helps us focus on lived practice made visible through
the trampled paths that crisscross landscapes as opposed to utilizing formal infrastructures [127],
providing a precedent of making a norm of breaking norms. This is particularly helpful for social
justice movements to push for countering the biases to create more inclusive infrastructures.
2.2 Feminism in Social Computing
HCI and CSCW research have used feminist perspectives to study how technology design can be
cognizant of existing societal power structures and be a tool for potential emancipation. Bardzel’s
[18] seminal paper on Feminist HCI (and extended by others [ 19,44,105]) argues for the critique
and design of technologies from a feminist lens that is informed by the lived experiences of women
(and other marginal users). Research has also studied how gender plays out in diverse settings
such as hackerspaces [ 46], research infrastructures [ 6], households [ 80], Wikipedia [ 76], fan fiction
archives [44], among others.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:5
Of particular significance is research and design work using feminist ideals to break the silence
of women about harassment along with actively combating it. Vitak et al. [ 148] argue for a more
collective stance to take on online harassment to ensure that women remain active participants in
online spaces. Rubin et al. [ 110] argue that reactive solutions to harassment often put the burden
of mitigation on the victim/survivor rather than the harasser. This is partly reflected in designed
applications that look to help raise their voice against sexual harassment by either documenting
and shaming harassers [ 39] or through collective action by women to create maps of safe spaces
both virtually [8, 48] and in the offline world [147, 152].
2.2.1 The #MeToo Movement. The #MeToo movement, i.e., sharing of personal experiences of
sexual assault on social media platforms via attaching the hashtag #MeToo, has been a significant
event in online activism and has garnered worldwide attention. Studies show how these feminist
counter-public narratives were making their way from hashtag campaigns into mainstream media
discourse in clear and direct ways [151].
Studies [ 142] have also argued that the movement will push employers towards more transparency
and accountability; however, warning that there will be backlash from employers, as workplaces
deal with changing work practices in the face of the movement. One of the goals of the movement
was reducing the stigma attached with disclosing sexual assaults, and studies[ 49] found that it
indeed was creating a counterpublic safe space for disclosures for a section of the population.
Andalibi, et al. [ 12] show that anonymity on social media sites such as Reddit played an important
role in creating a safe space that facilitated support seeking and provision in such stigmatized
contexts. However, studies also found that discussions of #MeToo social media posts online were
polarized, with most conversations focused on its politics [ 104]. Studies in global contexts [ 72]
found that the narratives and postings were shaped by culture, with the content reflecting the lived
experiences of the posters. However, the success or failure of #MeToo movement in the Global
South has been less studied. In China, studies reported the role of Chinese diasporic communities
in the movement along with disguised collective action where hashtags were used to circumvent
censorship. Studies of the #MeToo movement in the Global South found that there was less traction
due to social and cultural differences [ 57]. For example, in Bangladesh, Moitra, et al. [ 85] discusses
how the patriarchal society, lack of hope, and reliance on alternatives drove non-participation.
2.2.2 Critiques of #MeToo and Feminist HCI. It has been prominently observed that in the case of
#MeToo movement, the experiences of the marginalized are notably absent, only bringing stories of
urban, educated, privileged and articulate white women to the fore [ 91,97]. Existing socio-cultural
power structures exert control over how the social media platform is used, thus influencing people’s
participation on it [13, 52, 92].
The #MeToo movement has been heavily criticized for failing to recognize the nature of harass-
ment that women of colour face, including their vulnerability [ 91]. Drawing from Crenshaw’s [ 35]
framework of intersectionality, most of these works have focused on the multidimensional nature
of subordination and discrimination. For example, Phipps [97] argues that ‘whiteness’ shapes the
#MeToo movement, especially in how it invokes institutional power to seek justice, along with
employing tropes of ‘woundability’ and ‘performances of fragility’. These intersectional critiques
of the #MeToo movement closely relate to Dalit critiques in the Indian context and focus on the
multiple ‘layers of oppression’ [ 35] that shape everyday experience. Scholars have drawn par-
allels between the discriminatory reactions of sexual atrocities against Dalit women compared
upper-caste women and atrocities to Black women compared with white women [30].2
2Historically, the Dalit movement in India has been closely related to the Black movement in the United States since the
early 1970s. For example, the Dalit Panther Movement was inspired by the Black Panthers Party [ 11,30]. At a more cultural
level, there has been strong solidarity between the two movements and a continuous exchange of intellectual capital [ 149].
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:6 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
Making movements such as the #MeToo more inclusive is contingent on understanding how
sexual violence exists at the intersection of capitalism, patriarchy, and colonialism. In the context
of feminist HCI in the Global North, scholars have [ 7,100] increasingly stressed on how computing
needs to engage with the marginalization and erasure of Black women. Ismail and Kumar [ 64] make
a similar point in the context of the Global South where they critique current conceptualizations in
computing as being rooted in western capitalist notions of feminism. This renders them inadequate
to capture the perspectives and experiences of women and marginalized communities across many
parts of the Global South where, as per Mohanty [ 84] different and valid ideas of feminism may be
appropriate. Relative lack of participation in #MeToo in the Global South shows how social media
activism is limited, with social media platforms even being labeled as platforms for the ‘elite’ [ 109].
Those women who have access to these platforms in the Global South further face multiple layers
of resistance [ 122,138] including existing gender norms [ 8,33,55,113] and retaliation and abuse
[113] from often anonymous harassers [90].
Postcolonial computing recognizes that the ‘global’ deployment of a Western technology not
only fails in making effective changes in the local communities but can also contribute to the
creation of cultural imperialism [ 9,63,137]. Moreover, due to the long and painful history of
colonialism in the Indian subcontinent, Western feminism (deriving its concepts from a single
theoretical framework) has often been explicitly rejected [ 16,21,27,61] in favour of locally sensitive,
diverse ideas of feminism which encourage comparison between multiple, overlapping and discrete
oppressions [ 53,83,128]. Postcolonial computing is particularly relevant within the context of
South Asian feminism because it emphasizes on the need for “discourse centered on the questions of
power, authority, legitimacy, participation, and intelligibility in the contexts of cultural encounter,
particularly in the context of contemporary globalization” [ 63]. In this vein, communitization or
community-centric design has become a very popular mode of designing culturally appropriate
systems and appropriating available technologies as per the local context [63, 75].
3 BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
3.1 Sexual Harassment in India
Sexual harassment is bullying or coercion of a sexual nature or the unwelcome or inappropriate
promise of rewards in exchange for sexual favors [ 93]. This is a serious offense that causes several
negative impacts on the victims’ (survivors’) physical, psychological, and social health [ 45,73].
Unfortunately, the prevalence of sexual harassment is very high across the globe, especially in the
Global South, with women being the principal victims [51, 93].
Thomson Reuters Foundation conducted a survey of about 550 experts on women’s issues where
India ranked as the most dangerous country for women due to a high risk of sexual violence [ 103].
An independent survey by a media analysis firm in India has found that the registered cases of
sexual harassment in workplaces have skyrocketed by 54% from 371 in 2014 to 570 in 2017 [ 66].
Further, the latest available National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) Statistics for the year 2016
reveal that a total of 27,344 cases of sexual harassment were reported nationwide with 741 incidents
reported in the Delhi National Capital Region [ 28]. Constituting 94% of India’s female workforce,
women working in the informal sector and domestic workers are particularly prone to sexual
harassment, but their issues of harassment hardly come to light due to their economic and social
vulnerability [ 32]. A 2014 Oxfam India study of formal and informal workers in 8 different cities
reported that 17% women were sexually harassed at work, the most vulnerable being the female
labourers (29%) and domestic workers (23%) [40].
Working class people, mostly from marginalized identity groups, have particularly faced the brunt
of sexual violence. Krishnan [ 70] documented the sexual harassment women factory workers endure
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:7
from male supervisors which is often accompanied by verbal abuse suggestive of their caste location
and association with sex-work. It is important to understand that India is a hetero-patriarchal
society, therefore sexual harassment of LGBTQ+ individuals is often not recognized and spoken
about openly. Data from the Indian LGBT Workplace Climate Survey, 2016 [ 81] shows that about
40% LGBT+ individuals have faced workplace harassment on account of their Sexual orientation,
Gender identity and Expression (SOGIE) [ 62] and therefore, most of them continue to remain
closeted about their sexuality to prevent harassment and discrimination [ 5]. For instance, working-
class trans-men interviewed for a study in India reported being sexually harassed, assaulted, and
asked sexually suggestive questions such as “how do you have sex, how do you get pleasure, etc.”
by their (former) employers and co-workers which led them to quit their jobs [ 62]. The situation is
further complicated when the historically oppressed lower-caste and Avarna castes (those outside
of the present Chaturvarna caste system - the untouchables, unseeables and unapproachables - also
referred to as ’Dalit’) [ 106] and queer identities intersect at the workplace as many Dalit queers
don’t come out as Dalit and queer for the fear of harassment and discrimination [62, 117, 146].
In most places in the Indian subcontinent, sexual violence is a ‘public secret’ [ 20] – known but
not spoken of – as speaking about “sex” is taboo, and hence talking about sexual harassment is
seen as an act of immodesty [ 88]. Therefore, such statistics are often either under-reported or
hard to get as many women do not talk about the sexual harassment that they experience [ 8] or
tend not to report it, often due to cultural reasons such as victim-shaming and lack of support,
or a lack of awareness about the reporting procedures or the fear of repercussions [ 74]. This is
further compounded by the strong patriarchal culture [ 58] in India, where women often depend on
men for most things needed for their living including food, shelter, education, transportation, and
health [ 82]. Most incidents of sexual harassment remain unreported, making it challenging to find
a solution [14].
3.2 Indian Women’s Movement and Legal Frameworks on seeking justice against
Sexual Harassment
Infrastructures don’t exist in isolation. Standards such as laws are built on existing socio-cultural
arrangements and politics [ 26]. It is, therefore, important to ground the legal reforms around sexual
harassment in the history of women’s movement in India. The subject of sexual harassment of
women came into focus in the 1980s in India when (mostly middle-class) women in sectors like
health, education, airlines, and government departments protested against the sexual harassment of
female employees. However, these protests failed to garner enough attention from the authorities,
whose response remained lukewarm [102].
The popular discourse around sexual harassment at the workplace began in 1992, when Bhanwari
Devi, a social worker belonging to the Dalit community in Rajasthan, was gang raped by upper-caste
men. They were angered by her efforts to prevent a child marriage in their family, which was a
part of her official duty [ 30,77,94]. More than sexual harassment at workplace, this was a case
of caste-based sexual violence, a controlling tactic, where Bhanwari Devi was raped because she
as a Dalit woman dared to challenge the social norms of the upper-caste hierarchical structures.
Therefore, she had to be publicly violated to provide a spectacle and serve as a lesson for others in
her position [15].
Dalit women have historically been labelled as ‘immodest’ and ‘available’ as they work outside
of the private spheres of their houses [ 30]. It is no coincidence that they remain thrice as likely
to face sexual violence, based on their class, caste, and gender and are rarely believed (by the
police and journalists) and served justice (by the judiciary), if they ever report such violations
[15,128]. It is because key institutions such as the judiciary, police, media, and most of the non-profit
organizations supporting the women’s movement are controlled by upper-caste individuals who
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:8 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
either appropriate Dalit women’s voices for their own ends or silence them [ 38,133]. Likewise,
Bhanwari Devi faced many obstacles to get her complaint registered. The investigation in her case
was botched up because of the various intersectional power dynamics working against her. In 1995,
the Rajasthan High Court judge acquitted the perpetrators deeming upper-caste men incapable
of sexually assaulting a Dalit woman (on grounds of caste purity) imparting impunity as justice
[15,30,77]. This judgement led to a massive outrage across the country with widespread and
collective protests [ 15]. Many women’s movement and other civil society organizations in the
country rallied around Bhanwari Devi to help her achieve justice, but 28 years on she still awaits
justice [30, 77].
Importantly, those rallying around her largely focused on gender-based violence in relation to
sexual harassment at the workplace as the state authorities (her employer) denied responsibility
because she had been attacked in her own fields [ 15,59]. The protests on this judgement helped
build a momentum where Rajasthan-based NGO, Vishaka amongst others decided to file a writ
petition at the Supreme Court of India to make workplaces safer for women [ 15]. It was highlighted
that Bhanwari Devi had reported being sexually harassed by the upper-caste community members
but the inaction on part of the authorities led to her gang rape [ 102]. This led to the 1997 landmark
judgement (Vishakha vs. State of Rajasthan) in recognizing sexual harassment at the workplace and
laying down guidelines (known as the Vishakha guidelines) for all employers to protect women
employees from sexual harassment [ 77] till a legislation to deal with the issue could be passed
[141].
However, this judgement is critiqued on the grounds of intersectionality as it failed to recognize
and overturn violence of a public nature suffered specifically by those disadvantaged by gender,
caste, and class at the same time [ 15]. The dichotomy of Vishaka was that the survivor/victim from
an oppressed-caste background was unable to receive justice but legal guidelines were founded
on the atrocities she suffered. These laws/guidelines go on to favor women relatively higher in
the ranks of caste and class-based hierarchies while the situation of those marginalized by their
intersectional identities remains unchanged.
It was the brutal gang rape of a paramedical student in Delhi in 2012 and the public outcry
around it [ 30,70] that provided the momentum to finally enact the legislation “Sexual Harassment of
Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act” in 2013 [ 2] among other changes
in the Indian Penal Code [ 102]. This legislation made it mandatory for every workplace having 10
or more employees to have an Internal Committee (IC) (or Internal Complaints Committee (ICC))
to look into reported cases of sexual harassment. The members of this committee are nominated by
the head of the organization and include intra-organization as well as external members. Local
Committees (LC) have been mandated to deal with organizations having less than 10 employees;
informal sector and domestic workers and; where the head of the organization has been accused of
sexual harassment. The District Magistrate appoints the LC members and also a nodal officer who
receives complaints and forwards them to the LC. A simplified version of this legal framework is
portrayed in Figure 1.
However, according to the Right to Information (RTI) petitions filed by the Martha Farrell
Foundation (an organization working on the issue of sexual harassment in India), only 29% of the
655 districts in India acknowledged to have formed a LC. Among them, out of the 11 districts in
Delhi, only 5 have formed a LC, out of which only 3 have received training [1, 59].
Additionally, a 2015 survey [ 153] reported that 27% of large companies and 50% of the small
and medium companies have not been complaint with the legislation with many organizations yet
to follow its basic requirements of constituting an IC and training its members [ 96]. The law is
turning out to be an empty promise for most employed women [ 59]. It is also important to note
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:9
Fig. 1. Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 [1]
the gender-binary classification of the law as it only caters to sexual harassment of ‘women’ in its
present form.
3.3 Misogyny and the Indian Justice System
The mere presence of a legal framework does not ensure justice [ 42?]. Ability to make use of
infrastructures, especially those that deal with the sensitive issues of gender-based violence, also
depends upon the local socio-cultural norms [ 26]. For instance3, the content of the law requires
women to file their harassment complaint within 6 months of the occurrence of the last incident,
thereby limiting the time period for reporting their experience [ 42,112]. Many survivors find it
difficult to process not just the trauma of violations to their body but also the additional trauma
of recounting the incident many times over, society’s denial or belittling of their harassment
experience, societal labels, reputation harm, and going through with the complaint without any
assurance of a positive outcome. As a result, many women reel under indecision regarding whether
to report the issue or not [ 112]. Survivors also face a threat of punishment as the law provisions
for penalizing them in case they are unable to prove their complaint and the complaints committee
receives an adverse finding against them [ 42]. Most complaints committees fail to provide women
with any kind of redressal, leaving them further vulnerable [42, 112].
It also explains survivors’ frustrations with the ‘due process’ and in many cases, their cathartic
release using the social media to name and shame their perpetrators as seen in instances such
3Owing to the numerous issues with the law, we present only a few instances here
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:10 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
as #MeToo [ 107]. Nonetheless, women who have chosen to come out during the #MeTooIndia
movement now face intimidation, threats, and lawsuits [ 111]. Most recent example is of the
Delhi High Court ordering Facebook to reveal the identity of the curator of an Instagram page
anonymously sharing sexual harassment stories, naming and shaming the perpetrators based on a
defamation case filed by an Indian Artist who has been named/accused (without any evidence) on
the page [24].
3.4 Tensions and Frictions within Indian Feminism: Use of Social Media for sharing
Sexual Harassment accounts
A section of feminist scholars [ 78,79] have criticized the use of social media platforms to name
and shame alleged perpetrators as abdicating responsibility that is ensured by a just and fair ‘due
process’4. This critique came in the backdrop of Raya Sarkar’s List of Sexual Harassers in Academia
(LoSHA) shared on Facebook which is considered to have initiated #MeToo movement in Indian
academia [ 29,109]. The criticism was regarding the politics of the list as it promoted a vigilante
brand of feminism where men are anonymously accused as sexual predators without any context
or explanation [ 78,79]. Sarkar claimed that this information always existed as whispers among the
student networks and needed to become a declaration to warn students and also name and shame
the sexual predators on campus [29, 47].
This list exposed the ideological tensions and divides between feminists who were for and
against the due process of seeking justice [ 47]. Moreover, when it emerged that Sarkar was a Dalit
and queer, the prominent feminists critiquing the list were called out for using their upper-caste
privileges in suppressing the former’s efforts [ 4,108]. While recent publications refute Sarkar’s
Dalit identity [ 79], the question of caste has persisted over time and across different generations of
feminists due to continued power imbalances between Savarna (upper-caste) and Dalit, Bahujan,
and Aadivasi (DBA) feminists [108].
Owing to their social location, DBA women have historically been at a greater risk of encountering
gender-based violence [ 30,40]. Their struggles have been well-documented with scholars [ 11,96]
observing that upper-caste feminists do not speak up enough or demonstrate a similar degree of
outrage and action against the violence and struggles of DBA women as they do for their fellow
upper-caste women [ 30,77,133]. When the #MeToo movement finally erupted in India in late 2018
after a series of women from the media, entertainment, corporate and other service industries
spoke up about their sexual harassment experiences [ 74,107], critics pointed out that the spotlight
was on the voices of relatively privileged urban women, and was not inclusive of those on the
fringes, for example DBA women [ 4,32,69,120], disabled women [ 96,125], victim/survivors in
rural India [122, 123] and the LGBTQ+ community [89, 120].
Activists have been using social media platforms for mobilizing support and action on various
women’s and LGBTQ+ issues since the early 2000s [ 109,117]. Ray and Roy [ 101] provide various
examples of spontaneous public protests that have taken place in the urban areas that have seen a
number of middle-class youths participate with their sites of mobilization spanning both online and
offline spaces. However, lately the trend has shifted towards ‘slacktivism’ [ 87], making excessive
use of social media to lodge protests and there has been a general inability to translate online
movements and discussions into offline action [ 136]. In order to bring about a meaningful change,
Subramanian [ 136] argues for rooting of social media movements in offline initiatives and action
because action carried out on social media is momentary and not sustainable.
4In a later publication Menon [ 79] clarifies her stand on ‘due process’ to mean more than just legal proceedings, but in the
larger narrative it is still understood as legal process.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:11
4 DATA AND METHODS
We began our study when the #MeToo movement in India was at its peak in October 2018. We
conducted qualitative semi-structured, in-person interviews of middle-class working women in the
Delhi-National Capital Region, India to understand their perspective on online feminist movements
in general with a focus on the #MeToo movement. Women who had active accounts on any of these
three social media platforms – Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram (as the 2018 #MeToo movement in
India was active on all these platforms) were chosen for our study. We used a snowball sampling
technique [ 22] for recruiting our interview participants from a range of occupations. As the first
author was based out of Delhi at the time of data collection, we started by interviewing participants
within her social network, and then recruited participants following the suggestions of our already
interviewed participants.
Iteratively analyzing our responses, we realized that our sample was lacking in diversity. There-
fore, in order to include more diverse and intersectional perspectives we approached women’s and
LGBTQ+ rights activists, academics, as well as different stakeholders working in this domain (such
as lawyers, members of the Internal Committee, and allied multi-media organizations creating
interactive content) requesting for an interview on their perspectives on the #MeToo movement in
India. We first identified stakeholders within our networks and then used snowball sampling. We
also reached out to activists and organizations based on the impact of their work established in
noted print and online publications. Many responded to our request but declined to participate in
the study due to a lack of time at their end. Time is a precious resource for these activists because
time spent participating in studies comes at the cost of other priorities (e.g. helping survivors and
doing actual work on ground). Further, we attended public events on the issue of sexual harassment
where those stakeholders we could not reach directly participated, and we took extensive notes of
their talk.
Activists and stakeholders were asked about their experiences in dealing with workplace ha-
rassment issues, their perspectives on the efficacy and lacunae of the legal framework on sexual
harassment in India, opinions on the #MeToo India movement, reasons for their participation/non-
participation and how their initiative/work furthers the fight against sexual harassment or more
broadly against gender-based violence.
Between October 2018-July 2019, we conducted 44 interviews until we reached theoretical
saturation. Among our participants, 32 were heterosexual women (including women’s rights
activists), 10 queer individuals (5 identified as gay men, 4 as queer cis-women, 1 as non-binary
trans-femme person) and 2 heterosexual men (lawyers/activists). Our participants were between
the age range of 22-60 years, had a minimum qualification of being a graduate and were mostly
from middle-class families. Ethnically, even though most of our interviewees lived in Delhi, they
belonged to different regions of India. All the interviews were done in English and Hindi (depending
on interviewees’ fluency with the language), lasted between 45 minutes to 2 hours, and audio
recorded with permission. These interviews were later transcribed in English by members of our
research team. The data was iteratively analyzed using the grounded theory methodology [ 135],
entailing repeated cycles of data collection and analysis.
Due to the sensitive nature of the subject matter, all in-person interviews were conducted upon
taking a written consent of the interviewees. Barring the exception of most activists, lawyers, and
other organizational stakeholders, almost all the interviewees who consented to the interviews
requested to keep their responses anonymous. While most interviews were done in a single meeting,
some interviewees required the researcher to familiarize themselves with the individuals to be
interviewed by first speaking with them over phone or even meeting them once before they chose
to share their stories. Owing to issues of trust and comfort, some interviewees (mostly women)
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:12 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
also preferred to give their interview in groups with their friends/colleagues. We conducted two
such group interviews, where one was a group of 2 friends and the other was a group of 7 women
colleagues.
Our interview protocol comprised of 13 questions around the participants’ demographic informa-
tion, use of social media, opinions about sexual harassment at workplace, and online protests. Since
sexual harassment is a sensitive topic, we refrained from asking any direct question regarding our
participants’ experience with it. Instead, we asked them if they participated in any online feminist
movements, and solicited their opinions and experiences around these movements on social media.
We began the initial coding [ 31] of our data by engaging in line-by-line coding and followed it up
with incident-to-incident coding. Finally, in order to sift through our entire data and categorize it
incisively and completely we practiced focused coding [31].
Our participants used the terms ‘digital media’ and ‘social media’ as a catch-all phrase to
describe their online experiences in general. They used various social media platforms, chiefly
Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. While our study and the interview responses did not focus on
user experiences across the different platforms, the majority of participants reported being active
on Facebook, followed by Instagram with very few active on Twitter. Participants further claimed
to only be passive readers of the #MeToo posts which appeared on their timelines as shares - most
of these posts were authored by their extended connections rather than their immediate network.
During our analysis, we found that our data lacked Dalit women’s #MeToo accounts as well as
related perspectives by Dalit feminist activists. We conducted a further review of relevant writings
in English, focusing on public threads of twitter conversations (for example, statements put forth
by #Dalitwomenfight in the context of #MeToo), Dalit feminist webpages, magazine articles, and
published scholarly literature. This secondary data was analyzed and used to inform a more nuanced
analysis of how intersections of caste, class, and gender relate to the #MeToo movement.
4.1 Methodological Reflections
The first author involved in the data collection process identified as a heterosexual, middle-class,
upper-caste Hindu female belonging to the dominant majority in India. Having lived in India for
30+ years, she had also endured her own share of sexual harassment/violence in various domestic,
public, recreational spaces. This definitely had a bearing on the nuance of the questions asked on
the basis of class, caste and gender, but further conversations with activists working on these issues
allowed the questions to be refined to reflect various intersectional standpoints.
We thus attempted to understand how complex, intersectional identities [ 35] in terms of gender,
class, caste, religion and race [ 15] – configured within the South Asian processes of differentiation
and systems of domination [ 34,150] – navigate these legal and digital justice infrastructures.
Even though we attempted to purposely sample for diverse intersectional perspectives, we could
barely scratch the surface. A major limitation of our study was our inability to break into the
communities of resource-poor informal sector workers (who have access to smartphones and
internet), caste-oppressed Dalit and Other Backward Classes (OBC), and cis- and trans-women
within the queer community. Among the Dalit activists/women we approached, majority didn’t
respond to our emails. Among those who did respond to our requests, only one woman consented
– most denied participation owing to paucity of time, as previously discussed. Further, apart from 4
queer cis-women, no lesbian and bisexual individuals in the first author’s personal networks or
snowball reference consented to be interviewed – as they considered themselves more vulnerable
and didn’t want to risk identification.
On one hand, the first author sharing her own personal incidents provided for an empathetic
environment where participants opened up – from being initially reticent, they reflected and shared
their personal stories of abuse and sexual harassment. We would like to think of this as having
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:13
cultivated a safe and secure environment, since the author trusted them with her personal stories,
the participants may also have felt confident to discuss their harassment accounts of a rather
personal nature.
On the other hand, the dominant identity characteristics of the first author may have evoked the
sentiments of structural violence that oppressed-caste and minority communities have traditionally
faced in India thereby leading the potential participants from those communities to refuse to have
their stories told by someone in the first author’s subject position. A lot of Dalit feminists writing
reflects on the the issues of voice and identity privileges and takes the questions of who gets to
speak on whose behalf, to what end, very seriously [4, 69, 96, 140].
We feel that remaining sensitive to the context of survivors of gender-based violence is extremely
important when considering research on such sensitive topics, especially in the context of inter-
sectional and conservative South Asian countries. For our study, we observed that even seeking
harmless opinions around online feminist movements from the first author’s immediate network
was not taken positively, with most women participants getting defensive, denying any incident of
gender-based violence to have ever occurred to them. We were hence referred to many survivors
of sexual harassment through the snowball, yet we were unable to interview most of them as they
understandably declined to even remotely talk about the issue. Among those, the ones who initially
consented to share their story later rescinded their consent owing to the trauma of recounting
the experience again. The survivors who had sought legal measures reported the anguish and
exhaustion resulting from repeated telling of the incident(s) for legal purposes and did not want to
undergo the pain to do so for an academic study. For those who still chose to share their accounts,
we honored their wishes to leave the interview midway, not answer any question they did not
want to, and also deleted certain parts they initially shared but later were not comfortable in that
being analyzed for the study.
5 THE BLURRED BOUNDARIES OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT
The legal infrastructure for seeking justice against sexual harassment operates within the over-
arching frameworks of patriarchy and imbibes its ensuing politics and power dynamics from the
social norms. While the current legal frameworks in India have classified ‘sexual harassment’ of
‘women’ at ‘workplace’, its experience is far from being so neatly boxed. Our participants shared
that the boundaries of sexual harassment are blurred and don’t always conform to the strict binaries
of gender and workplace relations for the survivors who try to make sense of their traumatic
experiences. These experiences, especially for LGBTQ+ individuals, have multiple dimensions of
power and variables of emotions for which they lack vocabulary and language to express.
5.1 Expression in binaries
The legal framework imposes different kinds of binaries, such as either being the helpless victim
(seen as a feminine characteristic) or the brute masculine oppressor; proclaiming what is right
versus condemning what is wrong; the binary of “if it is not justice, then it is injustice”. Our
participants felt that many times, this kind of dichotomous perspective forgoes the gray areas found
within the historical context of the people involved, the complexities of their relationship coupled
with power dynamics at the workplace. Few of them reported that these binaries are grounds on
which this law can easily be exploited, as explained by one of the activists,
“Leaving aside the very small proportion of fake cases, let’s say that I am in a consensual
relationship and my partner (who happens to be my co-worker or boss) rejects me or
decides to move on, then, there is no space to talk about that hurt. There is not enough
sympathy. If I say sexual harassment, it gets me that sympathy... If there were spaces to
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:14 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
speak about hurt and rejection, in the same hierarchy as compared to sexual harassment,
then a lot of cases of sexual harassment would have been seen differently...” -(QA2,
Queer cis-woman, Queer Activist, Delhi)
The complexities of (inappropriate but not illegal) workplace relationships, as observed in the
example above, are layered with the choice of consent within power structures and whether those
lower in hierarchy have a choice, if not give consent. Their unique power dynamics are messy to
dissect and contribute to the gray areas in the continuum of incidents usually construed as purely
black or white.
5.2 Lack of appropriate vocabulary and its acceptance
The legislation on sexual harassment at workplace is not gender neutral. It has been specifically
classified to cater to the harassment of ‘women’ at the workplace. This was a consequence of feminist
groups engaged with drafting the legislation not wanting cis-gendered men taking advantage of
the law and hence they fiercely lobbied to keep them from being identified as ‘survivors’. As one of
the activists engaged in framing of this law shares,
“While I am not denying the existence of sexual harassment of men, its proportion
is miniscule in comparison to the harassment women in India face. Operating within
staunch patriarchal power structures, the law runs the risk of being dominated by
men. . . India is not yet ready for a gender-neutral law. . . ” (A4, Women’s Rights Activist,
Female, Delhi)
Attributing it to the heteronormative character of the Indian society, many participants, par-
ticularly those identifying as LGBTQ+, reported that there is a general lack of vocabulary to talk
about their sexual harassment experiences. Due to the legal classification of the sexual harassment
experiences of ‘women’, the harassment LGBTQ+ people undergo at the workplace falls through
the cracks. This particularly stood to affect men identifying as gay, non-binary or gender-queer
from accessing justice. They note that even within ‘sensitized’ activism settings, only women are
spoken of as being sexually harassed. Due to this reason, there is a significant lack of safe spaces as
well as lack of language and vocabulary-initiated inhibition to talk about sexual harassment within
their identity frames, as one of the interviewees shares,
“... we don’t look at sex from a very orthodox perspective. . . we are much more positive
and friendly towards sex per se, which is also true to a certain extent but that doesn’t
also mean that we are also not people who don’t have the sense of integrity or self-
boundary – so before raising the issue [of sexual harassment] I’ll be afraid that what if
I am type-casted as another promiscuous person? And what if my concern won’t be
taken so seriously? . . . when accepting yourself as a queer, [we are] unable to make a
clear distinction between what is a positive flirt or sense of boundaries. There is also
the concept of hurt, we also tend to get hurt by non-consensual advances.. . there’s a
lack of language and [safe] space to talk about it.” (QA3, Trans-Femme, Queer activist,
Delhi)
Struggling with the idea of facing harassment while being queer and negotiating power hi-
erarchies between two equal people in the same spectrum, the mainstream narrative ends up
homogenizing the experiences of the entire homosexual (LGBTQ+) community. Hence, in a situa-
tion of being violated, LGBTQ+ participants share that they lack language or a mutual frame of
interpretation for their experiences to inform the mainstream understanding.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:15
6 SEXUAL HARASSMENT AT THE WORKPLACE AND EXISTING JUSTICE
INFRASTRUCTURES
Under the Indian legal justice system, ‘place’ is a key dimension in classifying and standardizing
gender-based violence. It serves not just to mean a physical location but also the context within
which an incidence of harassment occurs. Through covering specific experiences and excluding
others, harassment can be tried under relevant legislations and criminal codes (not in a mutually
exclusive way). For instance, violence in the context of a ‘domestic’ setting is covered under the
Protection of Women under the Domestic Violence Act, 2005; sexual harassment in a ‘public’
setting is covered under Section 354A of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013; and
likewise, the sexual harassment occuring in the context of ‘workplace’ is accounted for within
the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013.
The law comprehensively lists the ‘acts’ constituting sexual harassment as well as the various
kinds of workplaces (office-based, organizational, online, home-based, third-party workspaces,
transportation, etc.) to be inclusive of diverse settings. However, patriarchal power dynamics
operating within these sanitized categories continue to keep survivors of sexual harassment from
speaking up and utilizing these frameworks for seeking justice.
In this section, using the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace Act, 2013, we discuss the
workings of the legal justice infrastructure in India in terms of the biases that the infrastructure
carries and how they relate to existing social norms and organizational practices. From the expe-
riences of our participants, we outline a range of biases inherent in the legal infrastructure for
seeking justice for sexual harassment that makes the process challenging for survivors.
6.1 Organizational Intent
In order to decentralize and fast track the process of justice-seeking, the legislation on sexual
harassment of women at workplace mandated setting up of ICs at the organizational level. However,
for the legislation to work, it is important that the organization truly believes in a zero-tolerance
policy towards sexual harassment and not view it solely as a legally mandated administrative
requirement. Participants shared that many organizations are guilty of paying lip service to the
legislation by merely conducting the mandatory awareness generation sessions on what constitutes
as sexual harassment at the workplace, and when someone complains, they don’t provide proper
support, appropriate resources and referrals. They also shared that within their work culture, the
IC is perceived differently from an ordinary inquiry committee because of the term ‘sex’ in it.
In many cases the IC does not have the information it needs because organizations don’t cooperate
with its members. Other points of contention arise when the survivor is no longer part of the
organization but the person accused is still working there and/or the complaint goes back in time
to when the accused wasn’t a part of the organization. There are also questions on the way forward
if the principles of natural justice are compromised when, for instance, the accused chooses not to
appear for the IC hearing because they have left the organization or are absconding, or the accused
is there but the survivor (complainant) doesn’t appear for the hearing. In all these instances, an
organization’s commitment to fight sexual harassment determines their response of whether to
follow up or ignore the allegation.
Legal experts and activists participating in our study also shared that nothing is stopping an
organization from following a gender-neutral policy towards the prevention of sexual harassment.
Since the ICs are decentralized at the organizational level, their members can use the same frame-
work to set up an inquiry in case survivors not identifying as women choose to report their case.
While participants reported that a handful of NGOs in the activism settings had taken this path,
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:16 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
they also noted that eventually it all depends on the organizational intent to root out the culture of
sexual harassment from their workspace.
6.2 Hierarchy and Bureaucratic Hurdles
Hierarchies, power, and bureaucracy manifest in different levels of justice-seeking infrastructure.
If the survivor chooses to take the Internal Committee (IC) route, then the committee has the
legal power to investigate sexual harassment at workplace, and based on their finding, recommend
disciplinary action. The power to implement these recommendations, however, rests with the
chairperson of the organization (workplace of harassment). Members of the IC (especially external
members) don’t have a say in the implementation of the recommendations they make, and are
rarely informed about the final action taken by the organization.
The legal framework has put in place Local Committees (LCs) for taking into purview all those
instances that are not included under IC; however, despite mandated by the legislation, LCs are
not in place in every district. Our findings reported funding to be a key issue as the Central
Government doesn’t have allocated funds for this purpose. Our activist participants shared that the
officials responsible for forming LCs get transferred very frequently, leading them to restart their
advocacy efforts in appointing a LC and the allocation of funds. This bureaucratic issue renders the
LCs non-existent or dysfunctional as they cannot even rent an office space for the committee to
discharge their duties, let alone paying an honorarium to the members for their services and/or
to even provide compensatory relief to the aggrieved woman/survivor. However, even in places
where the LCs are functional, its members are often unaware of their roles and responsibilities
due to lack of training. Even where the members are trained they lack sensitivity to deal with
such cases. For instance, women’s rights activists reported that there are just two functional local
committees in Delhi, yet their members have not received proper sensitization training and carry
orthodox patriarchal mindsets. They often cast doubt on the survivors’ experiences and demean
them. Survivors, in their bid to prevent further harassment and trauma, are thus deterred from
taking their complaints to LCs.
Since the maximum punishment that can be awarded by taking the IC/LC route is suspension,
transfer or termination from duties, our findings report that many legal experts now recommend
survivors to file civil suits under labour laws if they seek monetary compensation or file a criminal
complaint if they seek jail term for the accused. While it is not advisable that a survivor file a
criminal complaint after being dissatisfied with IC/LC proceedings, but if they choose to do so then
a detailed justification has to be provided.
Once the survivor files a criminal complaint, a formal police investigation begins. Lawyers dealing
with the cases of sexual harassment share that this is a hassle. Often, the police lack sensitivity and
the survivors are made to answer uncomfortable questions, where it is not uncommon to question
their character (blaming the victim). There are also chances that the police delay filing the First
Information Report (FIR) or may choose to not file one, as the authority to do so lies with them.
Further, there are concerns of corruption and bribery.
There is also scope for additional backlash as counter cases of defamation are slapsuited on
women who file criminal complaints, making it a prolonged legal wrangle for them. Even with the
survivors pushing past all biases and hurdles to file a complaint by any of the means discussed above,
the larger frame of societal dynamics is often more disabling for them than enabling. Commenting
on such hostile ecosystem for seeking justice, one of the study participants said,
“... This is a hostile patriarchal set up... when we thought the Farooqui Judgement5
[on consensual sex] “ A feeble no is not a no” was a nail in the coffin... the Chief
5https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/sep/26/a-feeble-no-may-mean-yes-indian-court-overturns-conviction
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:17
Justice of India made a mockery of the whole justice system by heading the same panel
which was formed to investigate him for allegedly sexually harassing a young female
employee... The helplessness of survivors has emboldened people [to commit such
acts and get away with them]. . . the whole system appears to be a sham!” (Ac7, Female,
PhD student, Delhi)
6.3 Technology and Burden of Proof
There is a heavy reliance on technologies that carry evidence, such as CCTV camera footage,
screenshots of chats and messages, call records, etc. highlighting that even though a balance of
probabilities6is followed in ICs/LCs determination of sexual harassment, if such evidence is not
available then it is just one person’s words against the other, which leaves them undecided on how
to proceed further. There are witnesses, but they may choose not to testify or might turn hostile; in
those cases it is a struggle to determine who’s telling the truth.
In case of criminal proceedings, the burden of proof solely rests on the survivor to prove that they
are not lying or “did not ask” for the harassment and that the accused is guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt. Even with the evidence in place, there are questions of due diligence – if the police are doing
everything properly, if they are collecting all the evidence mentioned in the original complaint and
are maintaining the chain of circumstances. As a lawyer we interviewed shares,
“...When you look at [a] criminal complaint, the crime has to be proven beyond doubt.
The path to travel to say that “yes, the offence has been committed” has to be with a lot
of evidence. . . Therefore, the real struggle is in cases of such nature where you’re saying
something that the other party will of course deny, in the trial if there is a variation
in the chain of circumstances or statement to what is recorded earlier, conviction is
difficult. . . ” (L2, Lawyer, Male, Delhi).
Our participants shared that there can be variations in the chain of circumstances between what
is recorded by the law enforcement agencies and what is presented during the trial. This can be for
a variety of reasons, including an honest oversight or deliberate malfeasance, such as corruption
(e.g. acceptance of bribe) or general apathy towards the survivor’s accounts. This, of course, can
get complicated, in the scenario of fake accusations.
6.4 Social Norms and the Workplace
Despite the existing legal infrastructure, most of our participants reported that women tend to
ignore workplace harassment because of: a) the social norms of stigma and shame associated
with speaking out about ‘sexual’ harassment, and b) fear of being easily replaceable, as one of the
participants shared,
“..For a predatory mind, women are an unending supply - she goes another comes -
this sense of entitlement is a colossal problem that makes women opt out of seeking
justice using the due process. . . ” (Ac6, Female, College Principal, University of Delhi)
Most of the times, the power and influence held by the perpetrators in terms of their workplace
hierarchy, social standing of class, caste, gender and social networks vis-a-vis the ‘type’ of employee
the complainant (survivor of sexual harassment) is - e.g. permanent, contractual, freelancer, informal
sector worker, etc.- is a product of social norms which stacks up against the survivor. Existing
power dynamics often lead to complainants being relieved from their job duties on some pretext or
not offered work within the community, especially if they work on contract or freelance. Women’s
rights activists shared examples on how even well known women face the same fate.
6Not based on strict proof but taking into account the inherent probability or improbability of the occurrence of an event
when weighing the probabilities and deciding whether, on balance, the event occurred
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:18 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
Moreover, when a complaint is filed, survivors also face opportunity costs that disproportionately
hurt those who are economically vulnerable and work on daily wages. Perpetrators, on the other
hand, have been reported to face little legal consequence as shared by one of the lawyers present at
the Network of Women in Media Public Meeting,
“.. We have to acknowledge everybody is someone’s friend. Unwritten social sanctions
help in the social rehabilitation of the perpetrators and further marginalize the sur-
vivor and their chances at justice. It appears that they [the perpetrators] face little
consequence to the law, job, or even a marginal shame. . . ” (Female, Lawyer, Delhi)
6.4.1 Marginalization and Intersectionality. For a large number of women from poor socio-economic
backgrounds, specially Dalit women and LGBTQ+ individuals, sexual harassment is an everyday
story. Women’s rights activists we interviewed reported that most of those women working in the
informal sector are unaware of LCs where they could go to complain about sexual harassment.
Even if they are aware, previously discussed issues with LCs, and a toxic combination of their
economic vulnerability, lack of job security, stigma, isolation, family pressures render them unable
to report the harassment. Dalit women have traditionally been seen as ‘available’, irrespective of
their disadvantaged or privileged background. One of our study participants shared that when
her friend – who identifies as a middle-class Dalit woman – was working for an International
Human Rights NGO, she was sexually harassed by her male boss. The IC of her organization let her
down by being unsupportive. Her contract was later terminated on the pretext of lack of funding.
Likewise, from secondary data sources we find that the social location of (relatively privileged) Dalit
women has been a professional detriment to their careers [ 86,133]. It is imperative to analyse this
situation from the intersectional lens of caste, class and gender because upper-caste cis-men tend
to dominate most corporate boards and upper management positions in India [ 10,54]. Therefore,
the caste and gender dynamics of a workplace can make an unequal situation unbearable.
The harassment accounts shared in our data also pointed to the problem encountered if the
harasser and victim/survivor are from the same marginalized community (e.g. DBA and queer
communities). The survivors are often pressurised to resolve the matter privately in the larger
interests of the already marginalized community. If they choose otherwise, then they are ostracized
for sabotaging the struggle of the entire community over the wrongdoing by a member of that
community. Further, our participants also shared that even when those most marginalized at the
intersections, e.g. Dalit women and transgender people sought justice taking the criminal complaint
route, the police did not believe them and kept rejecting their claims of being sexually harassed.
In keeping with all these issues, our participants shared that many times survivors choose not to
complain, withdraw their complaints or settle because they want to take the path of least resistance.
7 DIGITAL JUSTICE INFRASTRUCTURES
This section presents the point of contact between existing legal (justice) infrastructures and digital
justice infrastructures (such as online feminist movements). Using the instance of #MeToo, we share
how online feminist movements push back against the biases of due process as well as reinforce
existing power dynamics and create new ones.
7.1 #MeToo: Pushing back against existing biases
We highlight how #MeToo, emerges as a symptom of survivors’ dissatisfaction with the due process
by discussing the reasons behind sharing their sexual harassment experiences as part of the online
social media movement.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:19
7.1.1 Sharing without any expectation of justice. A section of participants reported that they or the
survivors in their networks shared their stories of harassment during the #MeToo movement as a
cathartic measure to validate their experiences. They did not have any expectation of seeking legal
justice. Those who were able to share their stories, were able to do so because of the support of
their families and friends. As a women’s rights activist noted,
“My understanding is that women who write on Facebook haven’t gone there for
justice. All these women are not saying that “we want justice”, what they are trying to
say is that they are mirroring the reflections of society, that all this is happening with
us ... Success is not just the fact that you were able to get someone punished. What
punishment can you give in this case? 2 month punishment, 3 month demotion – what
good is it going to do for the survivor? The shame that the perpetrators go through is
a huge success for me.” (A1, Female, Women’s Rights Activist, Delhi)
The public naming and shaming accompanying the catharsis of sharing the experience on social
media was reported to bring about some kind of a closure to survivors of such experiences and
served as an example of pervasiveness of the issue for others.
7.1.2 Sharing with expectation of justice. Certain participants felt that survivors’ shared their sexual
harassment experiences online to gain visibility as a last resort for justice. The survivors ranged
from those who followed due process and didn’t find the results satisfactory, those who wanted
to reopen unresolved old cases/incidences, to those who wanted to use this as an opportunity to
augment their present case by using it as an initiation or accompaniment to the due process and
build pressure on the institutions involved. As one of the participants working in a women’s rights
organization shared,
“So the women who came out during MeToo, they know that nothing is going to
happen even after [or just by] being a part of the court [legal] processes and that’s why
they speak up online. . . We have a few success stories, but can’t share them because of
ethics... Some #MeToo cases are under process where we have some hope of getting
success, some cases have been reopened... ” (A2, Female, Women’s Rights Activist,
Delhi)
This expectation raise comes in the backdrop of the mainstream media’s coverage of high profile
cases, which has led to significant public pressure in moving the justice machinery towards rapid
trials. However, this has not been without its limitations of some unfavourable judgements in face
of powerful ‘perpetrators’ (e.g. the Chief Justice of India [ 23]) and counter-cases of defamation
slapsuited against the survivors [24].
7.1.3 Sharing in Solidarity. This was the most common response of our study participants. Almost
all our participants agreed that publicly sharing sexual harassment experiences is an extremely
courageous act because it involves reliving the trauma and managing the sensitive and insensitive
reactions of both friends/family and strangers. The trauma of not being believed, trolled, or being
seen as someone who has invited some form of harassment takes a lot out of the survivor. Therefore,
many study participants reported sharing social media statuses with hashtag ‘MeToo’ in solidarity
with those who penned down detailed accounts of sexual harassment. These participants didn’t
share their personal accounts but just shared their friends’/acquaintances’ statuses by adding the
hashtag ‘MeToo’ or just a ‘#MeToo’ as a general status to acknowledge the pervasiveness of sexual
harassment.
During the interviews, some women participants shared that they don’t like sharing anything
private (i.e. posts that are personal in nature involving family and work life) because they access
social media for other purposes such as to keep in touch with old friends and/or to read news and
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:20 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
articles of interest. Therefore, sharing of harassment experiences of such intimate nature was out
of the question for such people. However, other participants who were relatively more open to
sharing their personal lives on social media reported being cautious about sharing their harassment
experiences because they didn’t want a digital footprint of their harassment accounts and didn’t
want their identity to be solely associated with that incident. One of the participants elaborates on
this aspect of digital archiving of such memories,
“...When I was first molested, I could not share it with my mother for years. At that
moment I didn’t have that language. When I told my boyfriend [that’s the] first time I
said MeToo... by putting it on Facebook, [such experiences] always remain there... I
believe that narrative should not define my life. I only want to share with a few. I don’t
want to go back to it, I don’t want to have a harrowing conversation on the topic in the
public, I don’t want it to be a topic of gossip... [such experiences have] emotionally
scarred me. I want to get away, I don’t want to revisit it. . . ” (Ac7, Female, PhD student,
Delhi)
7.2 #MeToo Interacting with Existing Legal Systems
A common thought echoed among the participants that the kind of disruption brought about by the
#MeToo movement presents an opportunity for government organizations and activists working
on the issue of sexual harassment to use such moments creatively to complement the activities they
are already doing. On their part, the activists highlighted their efforts in utilizing the momentum
by organizing a series of consultations with the Government bodies to push for a more accessible
justice infrastructure. This involved pushing to make the LC infrastructure stronger and ICs more
effective by ensuring they are not just acting on paper but actually stepping up to fulfil their
responsibilities. They also acknowledged the issue of ICs being just a recommendations body and
questioned its overarching role if the power to agree with and implement the recommendations
rested with the head of the organization, which was outside the jurisdiction of the ICs.
Most of our study participants, however, demonstrated a lack of faith in social media movements
due to the issues of accountability. Their views projected #MeToo and similar movements such as
the list of sexual harassers in academia (LoSHA) as kangaroo courts lacking in the principles of
natural justice, i.e. where those accused of a wide spectrum of misconduct from casual flirting to
being a repeat offender of gross violations have their names on the same list or platform and are
branded as perpetrators without being given a fair chance to be heard. On the other end of the
spectrum are the survivors who, although heard by a larger audience, are often viciously trolled for
speaking out. Under these circumstances, the question arises about the trust and accountability
factors survivors consider when making a choice of speaking up about their harassment. One
category of participants believed that if the survivors place their trust in the due process of going via
the various committees entrusted to provide relief by law, they would be protected from other forms
of nasty and unwanted legal complications such as defamation suits, as shared by a participant,
“... it is important to understand that #MeToo is not a magic wand... it exists in an
environment where there are many other factors when it [recourse] comes into play. . .
otherwise, one party does something that the other party doesn’t want [share incidents
publicly over social media], the other party takes other legal measures [e.g. defamation
lawsuit], making it very difficult [to reconcile]...” (Ac5, Female, PhD student, Delhi)
Another category of participants shared that survivors seek assurances in the form of ‘support
groups’ among the people they know and they can trust as opposed to approaching a committee
(IC/LC) formed of unknown people they don’t know and hence don’t trust in the matters of sharing
such intimate details. In a similar vein, the study participants felt that they and the people in their
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:21
networks who might be survivors of sexual harassment would not consider sharing their experience
over social media, due to the factors of trust, issues of accountability of social media movements as
well as due to the temporality of the matter and lack of on-ground support. As a participant shares,
“It’s the ‘flavor of the season’ effect... Everyone who uses social media knows that
public memory is short. People who are on social media flit from one issue to the
next because they want to make public on every issue and I think that victims by and
large prefer to put their faith in people who they know, whom they trust and who
would hold their hands and see [them through] to the end, because digital media also
opens you up to immense amount of trolling from completely disconnected people...
It’s okay to chat and share on social media, especially when there is momentum of a
movement. . . but the momentum in itself is momentary and that would be the case of
any movement on social media... It [#MeToo] lacks the commitment of a grassroots
movement or organizing. . . In my experience, they [survivors] would much rather go
to a real person.” [Ac6, Female, College Principal and Chairperson IC, University of
Delhi]
7.3 #MeToo Interacting with Existing Social Norms
The #MeToo movement was also able to push back and disrupt the status quo because the mainstream
media publicized these experiences. The furore it created around the issue initiated a conversation
and in the process – intentionally or unintentionally – normalized the phenomenon of sexual
harassment to an extent. Some study participants, especially young women reported, that it has
made it easier for them to break the silence around this topic at home and have a rather normal
conversation on this otherwise taboo topic with their parents and close relatives. One of the
participants shared,
“... Because of #MeToo movement being highlighted in the Indian [mainstream] media,
my parents are getting to know about this... my mother generally asked me and my
brother about this movement the other day, we told her it was about sexual harassment. . .
I come from a conservative family where females of older generations don’t ask such
questions [that have sexual connotations], especially not to their sons and daughters. . .
Now she is coming to terms with the fact that women are speaking up these days. . . It
is a progressive first-step that I can talk to her and my father about it. .. ” (P1, Female,
Scientist, Delhi)
Many participants reported that the older generations still have a tendency to blame the victim,
but even to get them to initiate a conversation on the issue which involves the word ‘sex’ should be
viewed as progress, within the patriarchal norms of our society. While social media movements did
not explicitly restrict anyone online from participating, our study participants unanimously agreed
the #MeToo movement was elitist, heteronormative and lacked intersectionality. They remarked
that in spite of the movement operating in an online space, it clearly reflected the offline societal
caste, class and gender dynamics of excluding the voices of the marginalized.
7.3.1 The Class and Caste divide. To assume that survivors have the autonomy to post their harass-
ment experiences online is naive in the context of a patriarchal society. It is further complicated
when class and caste divisions come into play. In our study, issues of hierarchy and privilege
surfaced with the question of access to social media as there was an observable absence of the
voices of poor and marginalized working in the informal or domestic sector, or those who lack
familiarity with English as the study participants reported not seeing any posts in Hindi or local
languages in their networks when the #MeToo movement was active. One of the participants
shared,
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:22 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
“... Take the working class perspective, for a large number of women from poor socio-
economic background, specially Dalit women and Queer women, sexual harassment is
an everyday story. What definitely plays out is access to spaces where you can make
yourself heard, access to language and vocabulary to express it. . . even the privilege to
put a hashtag on your experience is a huge privilege...” [AcQ3, Queer cis-male, Gay,
Ph.D. student, Kerala]
Participants also felt that the #MeToo movement had been springboarded from the white Western
setting in the same non-intersectional manner among the urban located and educated in India,
where a certain class of feminists who spoke in suave English appropriated that movement. Thus,
recognizing that the #MeToo narratives were mostly shared by upper-class and upper-caste Savarna
women, many Dalit women and feminists chose not to participate for various reasons as a participant
(who identifies as an ally) says,
“... As a Hindi-speaking person reading that, you wouldn’t even have the confidence to
post your narratives. When you see that most of the narratives are posted by Savarna
women, you wouldn’t want to participate because there is a severe lack of support
systems for Dalit feminists. The trolling Dalit women and Savarna women face is
different. . . because the Dalit woman knows that she doesn’t have the cultural backing
that a Savarna woman has. . . [hence] she says this is not my movement. I’d create my
own movement, whisper network, safe spaces. . . ” (Ac7, Female, PhD student, Delhi)
Participants also highlighted the lack of narratives from minority communities such as Muslim
women and Aadivasi (indigenous) women, along with those who come from a poor socio-economic
background and often don’t have the access to social media or the vocabulary to share their
stories. Some participants reported reading a few #MeToo accounts from survivors belonging to
the marginalized communities of Dalit and queer women (especially among those who had the
access to social media and the vocabulary to write), but concurred that these voices did not receive
as much attention as others.
One of our participant (A6) who identifies as a Dalit shared that since Dalit women have always
been in the public space doing physical labor, they have been considered to be ‘loose women’ or
as [sexually] ‘available’. Sexual violence against Dalit women has been a manifestation of them
raising their voices and saying things that were not liked by people. The #MeToo movement might
thus be a moment for Savarna women but it was not new for Dalit women. In the quote below, we
see their response to the purported absence of Dalit voices in the #MeToo movement:
“... Someone in an argument told me that the Dalit feminist movement is next to arrive,
so I shared an example of Bhanwari Devi and Phulan Devi as Dalit women who’ve
questioned the status quo and asserted themselves, they didn’t wait for due process.
That’s the kind of strength Dalit women bring to movements... I am sure they have
posted their [#MeToo] narratives in their spaces, but when you say that we didn’t
see any narratives posted by them, we put the onus of invisibility on them. Historical
exclusion occurs when we choose to close our eyes. So, visibilize them, go the extra
mile to look for those narratives or articles, share them and post them. I feel that as a
Savarna woman you can do that. . . ” (A6, Queer cis-woman, Activist, Delhi)
Taking the suggestion of participant A6 and other activists, we searched the web and found
many Dalit women and feminist activists’ writings on this issue. A Twitter statement put out by
Dalit feminists/activists with the hashtag #DalitWomenFight on #MeToo shared the sentiment
around the issue most comprehensively. It reinforced that Dalit women have for long resisted
sexual harassment from dominant-caste men, mixed-caste men, men from their own caste and
dominant-caste women, yet they can’t locate themselves in the ’me’ of the Indian #MeToo [ 36]. Dalit
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:23
feminist activists such as Dhanaraj [ 38] and Stephen [ 133] also contend that the struggles of Dalit
women have been invisibilized by the complicity of media, NGOs, feminist/women’s movement,
academia, the police and the judiciary, as the upper-caste individuals that control these institutions
either appropriate Dalit women’s voices for their own ends or silence them. Likewise, other writings
have pointed out that the absence of Dalit voices is a willful erasure of the structural inequalities
within the Indian society and not just a #MeToo-specific phenomenon [96].
7.3.2 Politics of Sexuality. A shred of consolation for the women marginalized by the class and
caste divide in the #MeToo movement is their ‘visibility’ in the formal legal infrastructures as
‘women’ who can seek justice against harassment. This is not the case with the LGBTQ+ individuals
(more specifically men identifying as gay, non-binary, gender-fluid and gender-queer) who in
addition to not being ‘recognized’ by the legal framework at present, didn’t find representation /
chose not to participate in the #MeToo movement as well. While many of our queer participants
noted that the queer movement leadership in India is very Hindu, upper caste, gay, male and urban,
even this did not reflect in terms of their representation or participation in the #MeToo movement.
Many participants attributed their non-participation to the lack of language and vocabulary-
initiated inhibition for talking about Sexual Harassment within their queer identities, as previously
discussed. Thus, for the fear of misinterpretation of their perspectives, unnecessarily inviting
trolling objectifying their identities on open online forums, that they don’t consider as their safe
spaces, they chose to remain silent about their harassment experiences. In general they felt that
the #MeToo movement, further amplified the heteronormative nature of the society and excluded
those who did not want to be categorized in various binaries as previously discussed. Moreover,
queer individuals who considered posting about their experiences online with the hashtag ‘MeToo’
felt certain trade-offs in terms of aligning with the politics of those at the forefront of the #MeToo
movement and how confining to the larger narrative would come at the cost of them negotiating
with their queer identity. One of the participants elaborates on this,
“...Those women who are at the frontline of the #MeToo movement [in India] have
certain political ideas around sex that maybe as a queer person I don’t completely
agree with... I feel that those women are women in power, they have a certain bit
of influence and so it became their own agenda... my experiences are not so black
and white, but if I am coming out with my experience and tagging it as a #MeToo
confession, then whether I agree or disagree with their politics, in order for me to get
a certain validation for my post, I’ll need to fall back upon them. I think somewhere I
have a problem with that... I don’t think I’m comfortable taking that risk... My story
first will be stereotyped in the binaries of a perpetrator and I’ll be expected to be a
helpless victim... on the other hand I’m still that promiscuous, loud personality which
they are not able to accept. For a queer person, I think accepting vulnerability in a very
public space also eats away a bit of your strength that you’ve been gathering.” (QA3,
Trans-Femme, Queer Activist, Delhi)
If on one hand, our LGBTQ+ participants shared the fear of diluting the queer movements’
strength by coming out as victims sharing their stories with the hashtag #MeToo, they, on the other
hand, also feared appropriating the movement by taking spotlight away from the Women’s cause
as they understood women’s invisibility and their fight. A participant explains this view,
“I felt that this is a space that the women are trying to reclaim in our society where
there’s not enough space to talk about even violence and sexual violence survivors are
shamed. So I felt that it was a space for women and it was a space for the survivors to
talk about it. A lot of queer people were hesitant to speak up because we thought we
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:24 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
are taking their space at a time when they need it. I feel MeToo serves a very unique
purpose. It has its own relevance, it has its own context and it needs to be seen in that
context. It cannot just be replaced in the queer movement...” (QA5, Queer cis-male,
Gay, Queer Activist, Delhi)
Thus, the residuality of LGBTQ+ individuals seems to have fuelled a dichotomy of fear of being
appropriated by the politics of the #MeToo movement and diverting the attention of the movement
from the cause of women.
7.4 #MeToo and Gender Relations at the Workplace
Gender relationships at workplaces in India have significantly changed over the last few decades.
Since the 90s economic liberalization in the country, there has been a rapid influx of women in
professional workplaces [ 99], precipitated by the emergence of the transnational call center and IT
industries [ 119]. This has led to changes in organizational policies and practices, many attempting
to create gender-neutral workplaces. Our participants shared that, for better or for worse, the
advent of #MeToo instilled fears among men in the workplace with men genuinely afraid, not
wanting to end up on any lists of sexual harassers. Thus, workplace relationships between men
and women are reported to have been strained after the #MeToo movement due to the fear and
ambiguity of what can be construed as sexual harassment. For instance, many participants shared
that men are afraid of having casual conversations (e.g. joking) with their female co-workers, as
one of them elaborates,
“...It [the #MeToo movement] has taken the joy out of light relationships we used to
share with men... we’ve had wonderful colleagues and friends with whom we could
share a thing or two without feeling compromised, but now they fear if we perceive
their behavior as affront or as sexual... whether rightly or wrongly...” (Ac6, Female,
College Principal, University of Delhi)
In some sectors, #MeToo is also reported to have created a general environment of fear towards
hiring women, with employers hiring men for the positions they hired women before. This strategy
of avoidance has stemmed from perceiving women as the root of the problem where if an employer
does not hire them, then they can avoid dealing with the issues of sexual harassment at their
workplace.
7.5 Critical Engagement with #MeToo
Our study participants felt that the movement was a threat to critical thinking and engagement,
as its functioning within the echo chambers of social media promoted the binaries of mainstream
heteronormative imagination, slacktivism and lacked a clear purpose/goal. As one participant
shares,
“There are people who put up posts and then there are people who troll them, and
if this is how it will be – trolls will keep on trolling and those who post will keep
on putting up the posts, then what added thing is social media is bringing into this
discourse? There are a lot of hate speeches among each other and that too going into the
heteronormative discourse of #MeToo versus #NotAllMen; perpetrator versus survivor...
against men, against women. When we don’t open up [offline] spaces, there are echo
chambers and opinion bubbles that are restricting the discourse.” (QA3, Trans-Femme,
Queer Activist, Delhi)
Likewise, many participants commented on the futility of such armchair exchanges on social
media where they felt everyone was arguing to defend their position as opposed to engaging in
an open-minded critical discussion. They felt no learning could be synthesized from such futile
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:25
exchanges. Participants also felt that by virtue of #MeToo being a social media movement adapted
from the West, it was ideologically entrenched in the very Capitalist and Patriarchal structures
it challenged and therefore should ideally not be a venue of lodging such protests. One of the
participants noted,
“... The use of social media tools [to spread the message of feminism is ironic given it]
reeks of patriarchy and capitalism... Feminism is about equality of all human beings
and also the acknowledgment of their differences... Feminism and capitalism are
incompatible... and the use of such tools [social media] by white women to protest
against gender-based violence made me reflect on my ideas on feminism and in general
on the politics of protest... After all, you can’t use the master’s tools to break the
master’s house” (P5, Female, Freelance Editor, Delhi)
Finally, activists working with the objective of removing taboos around ‘sex’ felt that the discourse
around #MeToo has pushed back the conversation about desire and sex to have such negative
consequences as sexual harassment. As a queer activist shared,
“I have always thought of it from what a disservice it did to that whole sexuality debate
that now there is love and sexual harassment, there is nothing in the middle. Sex is
there which can be good, which can be bad... having said that we don’t think this
movement has affected our intent to work on sex positivity in anyway, we still keep
talking about it.” (QA1, Queer cis-woman, Queer Activist, Delhi)
8 DISCUSSION
8.1 Imbrication and its issues
The ideal notion that the “due process” within the legal infrastructures will provide justice against
all odds was challenged by women who used digital infrastructures in an unconventional manner
(e.g. to initiate an online feminist movement with a hashtag on social media or lists of sexual
harassers) to demand or rather produce a kind of ‘anarchist’ justice. The imbrication [ 124] of
digital infrastructural routes of seeking justice with legal infrastructures and social norms provides
seamful spaces [ 145] – particular points of disjuncture, tensions, frictions and breakdowns – in
infrastructuring [ 98]. These spaces play a crucial role in determining how actors push back against
the challenges and exclusions to have their voices heard within and across the seams [124].
Seamfulness in earlier (offline) campaigns against sexual harassment was observed in terms
of how legal guidelines emerged out of the Bhanwari Devi gang rape moment where a case
of caste-based sexual violence was interpreted in the context of sexual harassment and unsafe
workplaces [ 15]. Fueled by the momentum of outrage arising from the judgement on grounds of
which Bhanwari Devi’s rapists were acquitted, this landmark legislation was achieved due to the
traditional (offline) virality of on-ground protests [ 30,77]. There was a popular sentiment regarding
the lack of seriousness around sexual harassment against female employees [ 102], which tapped
into the atrociousness of the judgement delivered in the Bhanwari Devi case to make a case for
safety of women at their workplaces [ 15]. In a similar vein, the seamfulness of #MeToo as an online,
social media campaign in India was initiated over the course of multiple moments – Raya Sarkar’s
LoSHA [ 29,109], complaints of women working in the media and entertainment industry [ 71,74]
– gaining online virality and indicating a symptomatic dissatisfaction with the due process.
Social norms and the divisions in the Indian society on lines of caste, class, and gender emerged as
common denominators between the past and the present, with online social media-based movements
deepening these fissures. While certain kind of ‘women’ were able to navigate across the seamful
space, many others could not and some chose not to. Those who could not push back against the
challenges and exclusions across the seams were those who lacked appropriate support systems
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:26 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
and didn’t share a) similar ‘class’ privileges in terms of their access to social media; and b) privileges
of ‘caste’ and ‘sexual orientation’ (to an extent) as those who were able to push back. Those who,
with their mainstream privileges or at the intersections of minority, caste and sexuality, chose not
to utilize digital infrastructures for justice (in spite of having access and ability to do so) could
not reconcile with the friction arising from the issues of privacy and safety, movement’s politics,
and lack of accountability fulfilling the purpose of the digital justice aspect of the online feminist
movements.
8.2 Residuality and Torque
Residual categories, whether explicitly labelled or not, exist in every classification scheme [ 26] and
expose the taken-for-granted in any formal system [ 131]. Residuality across these infrastructural
imbrications was observed because of the gender-binary classification of the law that caters to
sexual harassment of only ‘women’ at workplace. Intending to exclude the patriarchal influences of
heterosexual men7[120], the law also rendered the experiences of already marginalized queer men,
gender non-binary, gender-fluid and gender-queer individuals residual [ 131] within the existing
legal infrastructure. At this point, it is important to note that the exclusion of queer individuals from
being recognized under legal protections historically derives from Section 377, a remnant of the
colonial era regulation in India that criminalized consensual sex among same-sex adults [ 77,144],
which the Indian judiciary struck down in 2018 [ 129]. Many organizations are now advocating
amending the existing sexual harassment laws to implicitly recognize sexual harassment of queer
individuals and are pushing for the amendment to be accompanied by a comprehensive anti-
discrimination law [ 5,62]. However, standards possess significant inertia and they can be very
difficult and expensive to change [26].
The system breakdown due to its inability to classify the harassment experiences of the queer
community led them to experience torque not only as a part of the legal infrastructure [ 26] but also
as part of the digital justice infrastructure. Their torqued experiences in the legal infrastructure
either silence them from sharing their experiences or lead them to resort to different categories of
law (e.g. criminal law) that can help legitimize their experiences and seek justice [ 5,89]. Something
similar plays out over digital infrastructures. Due to lack of a mutual frame of interpreting their
diverse experiences and the complex nature of power dynamics in the queer experience of sexual
harassment, they choose silence and closed ‘safe’ spaces over the open spaces in which online
feminist movements operate. Their decisions are also influenced by the tensions operating in
terms of either aligning with the heteronormative politics of women leaders at the forefront of
#MeToo that they don’t agree with (as the women leaders promote various binaries and make
their ‘queerness’ invisible to fit into the mainstream narrative) [ 120] or the fear of taking away the
spotlight from women’s experiences and appropriating the movement to highlight their unique
struggles. Since the strength of the queer movements lies in making bold choices, portraying
themselves as victims while aligning with the narratives of the #MeToo movement brings the
frictions [68, 143] they experience to the forefront.
8.3 Marginalization of Intersectional Identities
Since infrastructures don’t function in isolation, this particular infrastructural imbrication was no
different as it inherited the class and caste-based biases of the ecosystem within which they operate.
Both working-class and relatively privileged Dalit women were seen as ’available’ and while the
working-class Dalit women could not complain due to factors ranging from the various issues with
7Indian feminists resisted making it a gender-neutral law, citing women’s vulnerability within the largely patriarchal
structure
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:27
LCs to the punishing realities of their intersecting class, caste and patriarchal oppressions, those
relatively privileged middle-class Dalit women were also not provided with adequate support when
they complained of harassment and faced detriments to their careers that they claim was due to the
social location of their caste [ 133]. This is true of different marginalized communities such as Dalit,
Bahujan, Adivasi and queer communities [96]. We also observed that in the case of intersectional
identities, existing power dynamics complicate issues of justice - for example, the rights of the
community might take precedence over the rights of the violated individual if both the survivor
and accused both belong to the same marginalized community [50, 96, 120].
In a similar vein, #MeToo movement, as part of the digital justice infrastructure, was observed to
be springboarded from the West through appropriation by privileged and elite women posting their
accounts in suave English. Even if we discount the experience of women/survivors belonging to
resource-poor backgrounds due to their lack of access to online spaces, there was a marked absence
– rather erasure – of (relatively privileged) Dalit and other survivor’s accounts that belong to the
minority intersections of caste, tribe and religion. Dalit feminist activists argue that it is because they
(and other minorities) lack the cultural backing of individuals belonging to the dominant caste and
religion, as they control various institutional infrastructures (e.g. media, judiciary, police, academic,
non-profit, etc.) that silence their voices and render their experiences invisible [ 37,38,69,89,133].
Dalit women have historically been at the forefront of feminist struggles, Bhanwari Devi is a case
in point who didn’t receive justice for her gang rape but her case formed the basis of mobilization
around the formation of Vishakha guidelines and ultimately a law on sexual harassment [ 30]. This
law went on to actually benefit more upper-caste, middle-class women (if at all) than Dalit women
because of their structural privileges [ 15]. Given the fact that Dalit women are at a greater risk
of facing sexual harassment, their conspicuous absence of their narratives on #MeToo movement
reeks of caste privileges and substantiates the allegations of Dalit feminist activists that upper-caste
feminists don’t go the extra mile to visibilize Dalit narratives [86, 96].
This also exposes the frictions [ 68,143] arising from the diverging values of elitism and privilege
embedded in infrastructures vis-á-vis the values of intersectionality that have been left aside by
design. Pegu [ 96] provides some interesting ideas on the way forward such as acting with solidarity
in creating and vacating spaces for intersectional narratives over social media because movements
that don’t work for the most marginalized rarely move the needle on status quo.
8.4 Postcolonial Computing and Online Feminist Movements
The #MeToo is a classic example of the challenges recognized by postcolonial computing on how
the ‘global’ deployment of a Western technology often fails to make an impact on local communities
in the Global South. However, the mere occurrence of this online feminist movement provides
insights about the survivors’ dissatisfaction with the due process and highlight the "trampled paths
that crisscross landscapes" (utilizing digital infrastructures over legal infrastructures) [ 127] they
are willing to take to seek a more just society.
In this regard, our study participants unanimously expressed – as also observed in historical
offline campaigns of women’s movement – that the momentum arising from such online feminist
movements can be tapped in a more constructive and intersectional manner if they are appropriated
by organizations/collectives that have a local (online or offline) presence [ 15]. These local collectives
that individuals can trust can then translate the movement from abstract online spaces and do more
actionable work. A case in point is the Twitter #MeTooIndia handle that was initiated by two female
journalists to curate sexual harassment survivor accounts (anonymizing the victim/survivors’
identity) but went much beyond naming and shaming the perpetrators by following up on the
cases while also providing a support system to those who came forward [ 95]. Similarly there are
many other examples of culturally embedded and appropriated local initiatives that have been
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:28 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
built/led by individuals within their culturally situated positions [ 63,138], using the approach of
community-centric design [75, 116].
The findings of this paper feed into new conceptualizations of feminist movements that make
visible the struggles of those with minority identities, and where race, class, caste, gender, sexual ori-
entation and other social divisions are understood as lived realities. We discuss the marginalization
and erasure of voices of women belonging to Dalit and minority identities in India whose concerns
and claims of violence are hardly taken seriously [ 38,133]. This deeply resonates with criticisms
of the #MeToo movement in the Global North too where movements often fail to recognize the
nature of harassment that women of colour face, including their vulnerability [ 91]. From a CSCW
perspective, our paper stresses on how the study of existing movements in the Global South can
inform more localized technology appropriation and help build new grassroots movements of social
justice. However, besides acknowledging and studying inequalities between subgroups, our paper
also emphasizes a transnational focus that brings to fore North-South power relations and their role
in shaping social media movements [ 67,84,128]. As we seek to build and support more inclusive
movements, we argue for an intersectional and a postcolonial approach: an intersectional approach
visibilizes relations of power and inequality while a postcolonial approach acts as a necessary
critical voice challenging the imbalance of power existing between north and south, western and
non-western settings [67].
9 CONCLUSION
As CSCW research explores the design of socio-technical systems that account for local and histor-
ical specificities, our paper draws on infrastructural ecologies to present in-depth insights about
the imbrication of digital infrastructural routes of seeking justice (like #MeToo) with legal infras-
tructure and social norms around sexual harassment in India. Our findings demonstrate how the
dis-alignments within this imbrication pave way for seamful spaces that provide differential oppor-
tunities to some (relatively privileged) actors to push back against the challenges and exclusions to
have their voices heard within and across the seams, and as a consequence shape social computing
practices to act on social justice issues. We also highlight the torque and residuality experienced
by individuals living with marginalized intersectional identities (in terms of caste, class, gender,
sexual orientation) that further weakens their efforts to push back across these seams. Our work
speaks to the global feminist movement where the struggles of the most marginalized are often
invisibilized, erased, not believed and not paid heed to by the key institutions such as the judiciary,
police, media, etc. – reiterating that infrastructure cannot just be read off of its design and material
configuration. Instead, it has to be read through the social practices of use that are mediated by
social structures around the constructs of patriarchy, colonialism, caste, class, race and gender
struggles. Future socio-technical systems need to act with solidarity and sensitivity in creating and
vacating spaces for intersectional and postcolonial narratives over social media in order to make
such online feminist movements work for the most marginalized across the world.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are extremely grateful to our participants for the time, effort and patience with which they
recounted their lived experiences and provided key insights for the study. We would also like to
acknowledge the comments and inputs we received from the reviewers as contribution toward
strengthening our work. This work was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada under award RGPIN-2018-06185 and the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada under award 892191082.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:29
REFERENCES
[1] [n.d.]. Martha Farrell Foundation. http://www.marthafarrellfoundation.org
[2]2013. The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal Act). http://www.iitg.
ac.in/iitgicc/docs/Sexual_Harassment_Act_2013.pdf
[3]Margunn Aanestad, Miria Grisot, Ole Hanseth, and Polyxeni Vassilakopoulou. 2017. Information infrastructures
and the challenge of the installed base. In Information Infrastructures within European Health Care . Springer, Cham,
25–33.
[4]Alice Abraham. 2019. In Conversation With Cynthia Stephen: Dalit Activist And Writer. https://feminisminindia.
com/2019/01/11/cynthia-stephen-dalit-activist-interview/
[5]Akshat Agarwal, Diksha Sanyal, and Namrata Mukherjee. 2019. Queering the Law: Making Indian Laws LGBT+
Inclusive - Employment . Technical Report. Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy.
[6]Michael Ahmadi, Rebecca Eilert, Anne Weibert, Volker Wulf, and Nicola Marsden. 2020. Feminist Living Labs as
Research Infrastructures for HCI: The Case of a Video Game Company. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–15.
[7]Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Nova Ahmed, Faheem Hussain, and Neha Kumar. 2016. Computing beyond gender-imposed
limits. In proceedings of the Second workshop on Computing within Limits . 1–7.
[8]Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Steven J Jackson, Nova Ahmed, Hasan Shahid Ferdous, Md Rashidujjaman Rifat, ASM Rizvi,
Shamir Ahmed, and Rifat Sabbir Mansur. 2014. Protibadi: A platform for fighting sexual harassment in urban
Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2695–2704.
[9]Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Nusrat Jahan Mim, and Steven J Jackson. 2015. Residual mobilities: infrastructural displacement
and post-colonial computing in Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems . 437–446.
[10] Dayanandan Ajit, Han Donker, and Ravi Saxena. 2012. Corporate boards in India: blocked by caste? Economic and
Political Weekly (2012), 39–43.
[11] Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar and Sharmila Rege. 2013. Against the madness of Manu: BR Ambedkar’s writings on
Brahmanical patriarchy. (2013).
[12] Nazanin Andalibi, Oliver L Haimson, Munmun De Choudhury, and Andrea Forte. 2018. Social support, reciprocity,
and anonymity in responses to sexual abuse disclosures on social media. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI) 25, 5 (2018), 1–35.
[13] A. Andrade and C. Urquhart. 2012. Unveiling the modernity bias: A critical examination of the politics of ICT4D.
Information Technology for Development 18, 4 (2012), 281–292.
[14] R. D. Arvey and M. A. Cavanaugh. 1995. Using surveys to assess the prevalence of sexual harassment: Some
methodological problems. Journal of Social Issues 51, 1 (1995), 39–52.
[15] Shreya Atrey. 2018. Women’s human rights: From progress to transformation, an intersectional response to Martha
Nussbaum. Human Rights Quarterly 40, 4 (2018), 859–904.
[16] Firdous Azim, Nivedita Menon, and Dina M Siddiqi. 2009. Negotiating new terrains: South Asian feminisms.
[17] Rupali Bansode. 2020. The missing dalit women in testimonies of# MeToo sexual violence: Learnings for social
movements. Contributions to Indian Sociology 54, 1 (2020), 76–82.
[18] Shaowen Bardzell. 2010. Feminist HCI: taking stock and outlining an agenda for design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on human factors in computing systems . 1301–1310.
[19] Shaowen Bardzell and Jeffrey Bardzell. 2011. Towards a feminist HCI methodology: social science, feminism, and
HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 675–684.
[20] Pratiksha Baxi. 2014. Public Secrets of Law: Rape Trials in India . Oxford University Press., New Delhi, India.
[21] Kamla Bhasin and Nighat Said Khan. 2003. Some questions on feminism and its relevance in South Asia . Institute of
Women’s Studies, St. Scholastica’s College.
[22] P. Biernacki and D. Waldorf. 1981. Snowball Sampling: Problems and Techniques of Chain Referral Sampling.
Sociological Methods & Research 10 (1981), 141–163.
[23] Japnam Bindra. 2019. In-house probe panel clears CJI Ranjan Gogoi in sexual harassment case.
https://www.livemint.com/news/india/sc-inquiry-panel-dismisses-complaint-of-sexual-harassment-against-
cji-gogoi-1557144334119.html
[24] Adrija Bose. 2019. A Year After #MeToo, Artist Subodh Gupta Files Defamation Suit Against Anonymous Instagram
Handle. https://www.news18.com/news/india/a-year-after-metoo-artist-subodh-gupta-files-defamation-suit-
against-anonymous-instagram-handle-2328791.html
[25] Geoffrey C. Bowker. 1994. Science on the run: Information management and industrial geophysics at Schlumberger,
1920-1940 . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
[26] Geoffrey C Bowker and Susan Leigh Star. 2000. Sorting things out: Classification and its consequences . MIT press.
[27] Johanna Brenner. 2003. Transnational feminism and the struggle for global justice. New Politics 9, 2 (2003), 78.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:30 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
[28] National Crime Records Bureau. 2016. Crime in India 2016: Statistics . Technical Report. National Crime Records
Bureau, Ministry of Home Affairs.
[29] G. Chadha. 2017. Towards complex feminist solidarities after the List-Statement. Economic & Political Weekly 52, 60
(2017).
[30] Uma Chakravarti. 2018. Gendering caste: Through a feminist lens . Sage Publications Pvt. Limited.
[31] Kathy Charmaz. 2006. Coding in Grounded Theory Practice. In Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide
through qualitative analysis. Sage.
[32] Sreeparna Chattopadhyay. 2019. #MeToo in India: The women left behind.
[33] Shira Chess and Adrienne Shaw. 2015. A conspiracy of fishes, or, how we learned to stop worrying about# GamerGate
and embrace hegemonic masculinity. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 59, 1 (2015), 208–220.
[34] Patricia Hill Collins. 1990. Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment .
Routledge.
[35] Kimberle Crenshaw. 1991. Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence Against Women of
Color. Stanford Law Review 43, 6 (1991), 1241–1299.
[36] Dalit Women Fight. 2018. Anti-Caste Feminist Statement on #MeTooIndia. https://twitter.com/dalitwomenfight/
status/1049914884417355776
[37] S. R. Darapuri. 2020. The Police in India Is Both Casteist and Communal. https://thewire.in/caste/police-casteist-
communal
[38] Christina Thomas Dhanaraj. 2018. MeToo and savarna feminism: Revolutions cannot start with the privileged,
feminist future must be equal for all. Firstpost (nov 2018). https://www.firstpost.com/india/metoo-and-savarna-
feminism-revolutions-cannot-start-with-the-privileged-feminist-future-must-be-equal-for-all-5534711.html
[39] Jill P Dimond, Michaelanne Dye, Daphne LaRose, and Amy S Bruckman. 2013. Hollaback! The role of storytelling
online in a social movement organization. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative
work . 477–490.
[40] Lucy Dubochet. 2014. Thorny Transition: Women’s Empowerment and Exposure to Violence in India . Technical Report.
Oxfam India.
[41] Michaelanne Dye, David Nemer, Josiah Mangiameli, Amy Bruckman, and Neha Kumar. 2018. The human infrastructure
of El Paquete, Cuba’s offline internet. Interactions 26, 1 (2018), 58–62.
[42] EPW Editors. [n.d.]. Why laws are not enough to deal with sexual harassment. https://www.epw.in/engage/article/
why-laws-are-not-enough-deal-sexual-harassment
[43] Sheena Erete, Aarti Israni, and Tawanna Dillahunt. 2018. An intersectional approach to designing in the margins.
Interactions 25, 3 (2018), 66–69.
[44] Casey Fiesler, Shannon Morrison, and Amy S Bruckman. 2016. An archive of their own: a case study of feminist HCI
and values in design. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2574–2585.
[45] Louise F Fitzgerald, Suzanne Swan, and Karla Fischer. 1995. Why didn’t she just report him? The psychological and
legal implications of women’s responses to sexual harassment. Journal of Social Issues 51, 1 (1995), 117–138.
[46] Sarah Fox, Rachel Rose Ulgado, and Daniela Rosner. 2015. Hacking culture, not devices: Access and recognition in
feminist hackerspaces. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social
computing . 56–68.
[47] Radhika Gajjala. 2018. When an Indian whisper network went digital. Communication Culture & Critique 11, 3 (2018),
489–493.
[48] Radhika Gajjala. 2019. Digital Diasporas: Labor and Affect in Gendered Indian Digital Publics . Rowman & Littlefield
International.
[49] Ryan J Gallagher, Elizabeth Stowell, Andrea G Parker, and Brooke Foucault Welles. 2019. Reclaiming Stigmatized
Narratives: The Networked Disclosure Landscape of# MeToo. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction
3, CSCW (2019), 1–30.
[50] Balakrishna Ganeshan. 2019. ‘Amnesty India mishandled harassment complaint, forced me to go to cops’: Former
employee. https://www.thenewsminute.com/article/amnesty-india-mishandled-harassment-complaint-forced-me-
go-cops-former-employee-95844
[51] Michelle J Gelfand, Louise F Fitzgerald, and Fritz Drasgow. 1995. The structure of sexual harassment: A confirmatory
analysis across cultures and settings. Journal of Vocational Behavior 47, 2 (1995), 164–177.
[52] T. Gillespie. 2010. The politics of ‘platforms’. New Media & Society 12, 3 (2010), 347–364.
[53] I. Grewal and C. Kaplan. 1994. Scattered hegemonies: Postmodernity and transnational feminist practices . University of
Minnesota Press, Minnesota, WI.
[54] A Gupta. 2016. Caste: why it’s still an issue for India Inc. Fortune India (oct 2016). https://www.fortuneindia.com/
{%}0Aworkplace/caste-why-its-still-an-issue-for-india-inc-/
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:31
[55] Debarati Halder and K Jaishankar. 2011. Cyber gender harassment and secondary victimization: A comparative
analysis of the United States, the UK, and India. Victims & Offenders 6, 4 (2011), 386–398.
[56] Frances Hargreaves. 2018. The #MeToo Movement, Intersectionality, And Its Implications For Dalit Women . Technical
Report. The Shiloh Project. https://shiloh-project.group.shef.ac.uk/the-metoo-movement-intersectionality-and-its-
implications-for-dalit-women/
[57] Naeemul Hassan, Manash Kumar Mandal, Mansurul Bhuiyan, Aparna Moitra, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2019.
Nonparticipation of bangladeshi women in# MeToo movement. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on
Information and Communication Technologies and Development . 1–5.
[58] M. Houston and C. Kramarae. 1991. Speaking from silence: Methods of silencing and of resistance. Discourse &
Society 2, 4 (1991), 387–399.
[59] Human Rights Watch. 2020. “No #MeToo for Women Like Us” - Poor Enforcement of India’s Sexual Harassment
Law. Technical Report. Human Rights Watch. https://www.hrw.org/report/2020/10/14/no-metoo-women-us/poor-
enforcement-indias-sexual-harassment-law
[60] Faheem Hussain, Abdullah Hasan Safir, Dina Sabie, Zulkarin Jahangir, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. Infrastruc-
turing hope: Solidarity, leadership, negotiation, and ict among the rohingya refugees in bangladesh. In Proceedings of
the 2020 International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . 1–12.
[61] Samia Ibtasam, Lubna Razaq, Maryam Ayub, Jennifer R Webster, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, and Richard Anderson. 2019.
" My cousin bought the phone for me. I never go to mobile shops." The Role of Family in Women’s Technological
Inclusion in Islamic Culture. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–33.
[62] International Commission of Jurists. 2019. Living with Dignity - Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity-Based Human
Rights Violations in Housing, Work, and Public Spaces in India . Technical Report. International Commission of Jurists,
Geneva, Switzerland.
[63] Lilly Irani, Janet Vertesi, Paul Dourish, Kavita Philip, and Rebecca E Grinter. 2010. Postcolonial computing: a lens on
design and development. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1311–1320.
[64] Azra Ismail and Neha Kumar. 2018. Engaging Solidarity in Data Collection Practices for Community Health.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–24.
[65] Margaret Jack, Jay Chen, and Steven J Jackson. 2017. Infrastructure as creative action: Online buying, selling, and
delivery in Phnom Penh. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 6511–6522.
[66] Kanishk Karan. 2018. Five charts show sexual harassment in workplaces is being recognised – but much more must
be done. https://scroll.in/article/898327/five-charts-show-sexual-harassment-in-workplaces-is-being-recognised-
but-much-more-must-be-done
[67] Ina Kerner. 2017. Relations of difference: Power and inequality in intersectional and postcolonial feminist theories.
Current Sociology 65, 6 (2017), 846–866.
[68] Matthias Korn and Amy Voida. 2015. Creating friction: infrastructuring civic engagement in everyday life. In
Proceedings of The Fifth Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives . Aarhus University Press, 145–156.
[69] Asha Kowtal. 2019. Building a Feminism That Centres the Voices of the Oppressed. https://thewire.in/caste/building-
a-feminism-that-centres-the-voices-of-the-oppressed
[70] Kavita Krishnan. 2020. Fearless Freedom . Penguin Random House India Private Limited.
[71] Raksha Kumar. 2018. Why the ‘Me Too’ movement in India is succeeding at last. https://www.opendemocracy.net/
en/5050/me-too-india-succeeding-at-last/
[72] Irene Lopez, Robin Quillivic, Hayley Evans, and Rosa I Arriaga. 2019. Denouncing Sexual Violence: A Cross-Language
and Cross-Cultural Analysis of# MeToo and# BalanceTonPorc. In IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction .
Springer, 733–743.
[73] Pamela Hewitt Loy and Lea P Stewart. 1984. The extent and effects of the sexual harassment of working women.
Sociological focus 17, 1 (1984), 31–43.
[74] C Mallapur and A Alphonso. 2018. #MeTooIndia: 54% rise in sexual harassment reported at workplaces between
2014-17. https://www.indiaspend.com/metooindia-54-rise-in-sexual-harassment-reported-at-workplaces-between-
2014-17/
[75] G. Marsden, A. Maunder, and M. Parker. 2008. People are people, but technology is not technology. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society 366 (2008), 3795–3804.
[76] Amanda Menking and Ingrid Erickson. 2015. The heart work of Wikipedia: Gendered, emotional labor in the world’s
largest online encyclopedia. In Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in computing systems .
207–210.
[77] Nivedita Menon. 2012. Seeing like a feminist . Penguin UK.
[78] Nivedita Menon. 2017. Statements by Feminists on Facebook Campaign to "Name and Shame". https://kafila.online/
2017/10/24/statement-by-feminists-on-facebook-campaign-to-name-and-shame/
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:32 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
[79] Nivedita Menon. 2019. Sexual violence and the law in India. In Research Handbook on Feminist Jurisprudence . Edward
Elgar Publishing.
[80] Nusrat Jahan Mim and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. Others’ Images: Online Social Media, Architectural Improvisations,
and Spatial Marginalization in Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems . 1–14.
[81] Mission for Indian Gay and Lesbian Empowerment. 2016. The Indian LGBT Climate Survey . Technical Report.
http://mingle.org.in/{_}workplace-report-2016.php
[82] S. Mitter. 1992. Dependency and Autonomy: Women’s Employment and the Family in Calcutta . Technical Report.
[83] Chandra Talpade Mohanty. 1988. Under Western eyes: Feminist scholarship and colonial discourses. Feminist Review
30 (1988), 61–88.
[84] Chandra Talpade Mohanty. 2003. "Under Western eyes" revisited: feminist solidarity through anticapitalist struggles.
Signs: Journal of Women in culture and Society 28, 2 (2003), 499–535.
[85] Aparna Moitra, Naeemul Hassan, Manash Kumar Mandal, Mansurul Bhuiyan, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020.
Understanding the Challenges for Bangladeshi Women to Participate in# MeToo Movement. Proceedings of the ACM
on Human-Computer Interaction 4, GROUP (2020), 1–25.
[86] Mimi Mondal. 2018. A Dalit woman’s thoughts on #MeTooIndia. https://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/a-dalit-
womans-thoughts-on-metooindia-5402538/
[87] E. Morozov. 2009. The Brave New World of Slacktivism. Foreign Policy 19, 5 (2009).
[88] J. Nair and M. E. John. 2002. A question of silence: The sexual economies of modern India . Zed Books.
[89] Navin Noronha. 2018. #MeToo Queer Stories. https://www.vice.com/en{_}in/article/598q7n/metoo-queer-stories
[90] F.F Nova, Md. Rashidujjaman Rifat, P Saha, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, and S Guha. 2019. Online sexual harassment
over anonymous social media in Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Information and
Communication Technologies and Development . 1.
[91] Angela Onwuachi-Willig. 2018. What about# UsToo: The invisibility of race in the# MeToo movement. Yale LJF 128
(2018), 105.
[92] W. J. Orlikowski. 2002. Using technology and constituting structures: A practice lens for studying technology in
organizations. Organizational Science 11, 4 (2002), 404–428.
[93] Michele A Paludi and Richard B Barickman. 1991. Academic and workplace sexual harassment: A resource manual .
Suny Press.
[94] Geeta Pandey. 2017. Bhanwari Devi: The rape that led to India’s sexual harassment law. https://www.bbc.com/news/
world-asia-india-39265653
[95] T. Patel. 2018. #MeToo Ahead: Here’s how the movement is going beyond Tweets and Name calling. https:
//www.thebetterindia.com/162045/metoo-twitter-rituparna-chatterjee-lawyer-news/
[96] Sanjana Pegu. 2019. MeToo in India: building revolutions from solidarities. Decision 46, 2 (2019), 151–168.
[97] Alison Phipps. 2019. " Every Woman Knows a Weinstein": Political Whiteness and White Woundedness in# MeToo
and Public Feminisms around Sexual Violence. Feminist Formations 31, 2 (2019), 1–25.
[98] Volkmar Pipek and Volker Wulf. 2009. Infrastructuring: Toward an integrated perspective on the design and use of
information technology. Journal of the Association for Information Systems 10, 5 (2009), 1.
[99] Smitha Radhakrishnan. 2009. Professional women, good families: Respectable femininity and the cultural politics of a
“new” India. Qualitative Sociology 32, 2 (2009), 195–212.
[100] Yolanda A Rankin and Jakita O Thomas. 2019. Straighten up and fly right: rethinking intersectionality in HCI research.
interactions 26, 6 (2019), 64–68.
[101] Raka Ray and Srila Roy. 2019. Excerpt: Feminism, Gender Politics and Resistance in Indian Democracy. https:
//thewire.in/books/excerpt-feminism-gender-politics-and-resistance-in-indian-democracy
[102] Tilottama Raychaudhuri. 2017. The Law relating to Sexual Harassment in India: An Analysis. International Journal of
Legal Studies and Research 6, 2 (2017).
[103] Thomson Reuters. 2018. India Most Dangerous Country For Women, US In 10 Worst: Survey. https://www.ndtv.
com/india-news/india-most-dangerous-country-for-women-with-sexual-violence-rife-poll-1873117
[104] Eugenia Ha Rim Rho and Melissa Mazmanian. 2020. Political Hashtags & the Lost Art of Democratic Discourse. In
Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–13.
[105] Jennifer A Rode. 2011. A theoretical agenda for feminist HCI. Interacting with Computers 23, 5 (2011), 393–400.
[106] Arundhati Roy. 2017. The doctor and the saint: Caste, race, and annihilation of caste, the debate between BR Ambedkar
and MK Gandhi . Haymarket Books.
[107] Abhery Roy. 2019. 2018: The Year When #MeToo Shook India. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/magazines/
panache/2018-the-year-when-metoo-shook-india/2018-the-year-of-metoo-in-india/slideshow/66346583.cms
[108] Srila Roy. 2017. Whose feminism is it anyway? https://thewire.in/gender/whose-feminism-anyway
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.Parsing the ‘Me’ in #MeToo: Sexual Harassment, Social Media, and Justice Infrastructures 111:33
[109] Srila Roy. 2018. #MeToo is a crucial moment to revisit the history of Indian feminism. Economic & Political Weekly 53,
42 (2018).
[110] Jennifer D Rubin, Lindsay Blackwell, and Terri D Conley. 2020. Fragile Masculinity: Men, Gender, and Online
Harassment. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–14.
[111] M Safi. 2019. India’s #MeToo backlash: accusers battle intimidation, threats and lawsuits. https://www.theguardian.
com/world/2019/may/14/indias-metoo-backlash-accusers-battle-intimidation-threats-and-lawsuits
[112] Monica Sakhrani. 2017. Sexual Harassment: The Conundrum of Law, Due Process, and Justice. Economic & Political
Weekly Engage 52, 50 (2017). https://www.epw.in/engage/article/sexual-harassment-conundrum-law-due-process-
and-justice
[113] Nithya Sambasivan, Amna Batool, Nova Ahmed, Tara Matthews, Kurt Thomas, Laura Sanely Gaytán-Lugo, David
Nemer, Elie Bursztein, Elizabeth Churchill, and Sunny Consolvo. 2019. " They Don’t Leave Us Alone Anywhere
We Go" Gender and Digital Abuse in South Asia. In proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems . 1–14.
[114] Ari Schlesinger, W Keith Edwards, and Rebecca E Grinter. 2017. Intersectional HCI: Engaging identity through gender,
race, and class. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 5412–5427.
[115] Bryan Semaan. 2019. ’Routine Infrastructuring’as’ Building Everyday Resilience with Technology’ When Disruption
Becomes Ordinary. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–24.
[116] Aaditeshwar Seth, Akshay Gupta, Aparna Moitra, Deepak Kumar, Dipanjan Chakraborty, Lamuel Enoch, Orlanda
Ruthven, Paramita Panjal, Rafi Ahmed Siddiqi, Rohit Singh, Sayonee Chatterjee, Sangeeta Saini, Sultan Ahmed,
and Vijay Sai Pratap. 2020. Reflections from Practical Experiences of Managing Participatory Media Platforms for
Development. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and
Development . ACM.
[117] Parmesh Shahani. 2020. Queeristan: LGBT Inclusion at the Indian Workplace . Westland Business, Chennai, India.
[118] Karthik Shankar. 2017. Why I Published A List Of Sexual Predators In Academia. https://www.buzzfeed.com/
karthikshankar/why-i-published-a-list-of-sexual-predators-in-academia
[119] Deepthi Shanker. 2008. Gender relations in IT companies: An Indian experience. Gender, Technology and Development
12, 2 (2008), 185–207.
[120] Ditilekha Sharma. 2018. What Is Missing In the #MeToo Movement? Economic and Political Weekly 53, 49 (2018).
https://www.epw.in/engage/article/what-is-missing-metoo-movement-limitation-law-justice
[121] Emily Shugerman. 2017. Me Too: Why are women sharing stories of sexual assault and how did it start?
[122] Zainab Sikander. 2019. Unnao rape survivor’s case shows rural India needs a MeToo. https://theprint.in/opinion/
unnao-rape-survivors-case-shows-rural-india-needs-a-metoo/272260/
[123] Makepeace Silthou. 2019. Indian media’s MeToo movement left out its countless women freelancers in hinter-
land. https://thepolisproject.com/indian-medias-metoo-movement-left-out-its-countless-women-freelancers-in-
hinterland/
[124] Ranjit Singh and Steven J Jackson. 2017. From Margins to Seams: Imbrication, Inclusion, and Torque in the Aadhaar
Identification Project. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 4776–4824.
[125] Surabhi Singh. 2016. Whose story is Indian feminism telling? Raiot (mar 2016).
[126] Robert Soden and Nate Kauffman. 2019. Infrastructuring the Imaginary: How Sea-Level Rise Comes to Matter in the
San Francisco Bay Area. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–11.
[127] Robert Soden and Leysia Palen. 2016. Infrastructure in the wild: What mapping in post-earthquake Nepal reveals
about infrastructural emergence. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .
2796–2807.
[128] G C Spivak. 1988. Can the subaltern speak? In Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture . Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 272–313.
[129] The Wire Staff. 2018. Supreme Court Scraps Section 377; ’Majoritarian Views Cannot Dictate Rights,’ Says CJI.
https://thewire.in/law/supreme-court-scraps-section-377-majoritarian-views-cannot-dictate-rights-says-cji
[130] Susan Leigh Star. 1999. The ethnography of infrastructure. American behavioral scientist 43, 3 (1999), 377–391.
[131] Susan Leigh Star and Geoffrey C Bowker. 2007. Enacting silence: Residual categories as a challenge for ethics,
information systems, and communication. Ethics and Information Technology 9, 4 (2007), 273–280.
[132] Susan Leigh Star and Anselm Strauss. 1999. Layers of silence, arenas of voice: The ecology of visible and invisible
work. Computer supported cooperative work (CSCW) 8, 1-2 (1999), 9–30.
[133] Cynthia Stephen. 2018. #MeToo: The NGO Sector Systematically Silences Dalit, Tribal and Bahujan Voices. https:
//thewire.in/caste/metoo-the-ngo-sector-systematically-silences-dalit-tribal-and-bahujan-voices
[134] Sandy Stone. 1991. The Empire Strikes Back: A Posttranssexual Manifesto in Body Guards: The Cultural Politics of
Gender Ambiguity, ed. Julia Epstain and Kristina Straub (New York: Routledge) (1991).
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.111:34 Aparna Moitra, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, & Priyank Chandra
[135] A. Strauss and J. Corbin. 1994. Grounded theory methodology. In Handbook of qualitative research . Chapter 17,
273–285.
[136] Sujatha Subramanian. 2015. From the Streets to the Web Looking at Feminist Activism on Social Media. Economic &
Political Weekly L, 17 (2015), 71–78.
[137] Sharifa Sultana and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2019. Witchcraft and hci: Morality, modernity, and postcolonial computing
in rural bangladesh. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–15.
[138] S. Sultana, F. Guimbretiere, P. Sengers, and N. Dell. 2018. Design Within a Patriarchal Society: Opportunities and
Challenges in Designing for Rural Women in Bangladesh. In 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems .
[139] Cass R Sunstein. 2019. # MeToo as a Revolutionary Cascade. University of Chicago Legal Forum (2019), 261.
[140] FII Team. 2016. Feminism In India’s New Editorial Policy. https://feminisminindia.com/2016/07/06/fii-new-editorial-
policy/{#}.V3zP-dJ97cs
[141] Maduli Thaosen. 2017. Bhanwari Devi: A Hero We Failed. https://feminisminindia.com/2017/03/03/bhanwari-devi-
essay/
[142] Elizabeth C Tippett. 2018. The Legal Implications of the MeToo Movement. Minn. L. Rev. 103 (2018), 229.
[143] Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing. 2011. Friction: An ethnography of global connection . Princeton University Press.
[144] Ruth Vanita and Saleem Kidwai. 2000. Same-sex love in India: Readings in Indian literature . Springer.
[145] Janet Vertesi. 2014. Seamful spaces: Heterogeneous infrastructures in interaction. Science, Technology, & Human
Values 39, 2 (2014), 264–284.
[146] Living Smile Vidya. 2013. I am Vidya: A Transgender’s Journey . Rupa Publications.
[147] Kalpana Viswanath and Ashish Basu. 2015. SafetiPin: an innovative mobile app to collect data on women’s safety in
Indian cities. Gender & Development 23, 1 (2015), 45–60.
[148] Jessica Vitak, Kalyani Chadha, Linda Steiner, and Zahra Ashktorab. 2017. Identifying Women’s Experiences With
and Strategies for Mitigating Negative Effects of Online Harassment. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . 1231–1245.
[149] Isabel Wilkerson. 2020. Caste: The Lies That Divide Us . Allen lane.
[150] Marisol Wong-Villacres, Arkadeep Kumar, Aditya Vishwanath, Naveena Karusala, Betsy DiSalvo, and Neha Kumar.
2018. Designing for intersections. DIS 2018 - Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference (2018),
45–58. https://doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196794
[151] Nancy Worthington. 2020. Celebrity-bashing or# MeToo contribution? New York Times Online readers debate the
boundaries of hashtag feminism. The Communication Review (2020), 1–20.
[152] Chelsea Young. 2014. HarassMap: Using crowdsourced data to map sexual harassment in Egypt. Technology Innovation
Management Review 4, 3 (2014).
[153] Ernst & Young. 2015. Reining in sexual harassment at the workplace in India. Technical Report. Ernst & Young. https:
//www.ey.com/in/en/newsroom/news-releas{%}0Des/ey-corporate-india-awakens-to-sexual-harassment-threat.
[154] Claire Zillman. 2017. A New Poll on Sexual Harassment Suggests Why ’Me Too’ Went So Insanely Viral. Fortune (oct
2017).
Received June 2020; revised October 2020; accepted December 2020
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 111. Publication date: April 2021.