The Causes of College Students’ Religious Identity and
Countermeasures——Based on Psychology
Tao Wei
Office of Discipline Development,
Northwestern Polytechnical
University, Xi’an, China, e-mail:
taowei@nwpu.edu.cn, Corresponding
authorHongying Zhang
Students’ Affairs Division,
Northwestern Polytechnical
University, Xi’an, China, e-mail:
zhhy@nwpu.edu.cnNianfei Li
Party Building Office, China
Aeronautics Computing Technique
Research Institutename, Xi’an, China,
e-mail:
li_303551@163.com
Abibula Muzaiti
Students’ Affairs Division,
Northwestern Polytechnical
University, Xi’an, China, e-mail:
muzha@nwpu.edu.cnXi Wang
Office of Discipline Development,
Northwestern Polytechnical
University, Xi’an, China
e-mail:wx_westking@nwpu.edu.cnWei Ke
School of Materials, Northwestern
Polytechnical University, Xi’an,
China, e-mail:
kewei0327@163.com
ABSTRACT
Based on psychology, this paper makes a detailed research on the
causes of college students’ religious identity from cognition, behav-
ior and emotion. Moreover, it also proposes measures to prevent the
infiltration of extreme religions in colleges and universities, which
provides the theoretical and practical basis for the ideological and
political education of college students in the new era.
CCS CONCEPTS
•CCS –> Applied computing →Education; Collaborative learn-
ing.
KEYWORDS
Psychology, Religious Identity, Ideological and Political Education
ACM Reference Format:
Tao Wei, Hongying Zhang, Nianfei Li, Abibula Muzaiti, Xi Wang,
and Wei Ke. 2021. The Causes of College Students’ Religious Identity and
Countermeasures——Based on Psychology. In 2021 2nd International Confer-
ence on Computers, Information Processing and Advanced Education (CIPAE
2021), May 25–27, 2021, Ottawa, ON, Canada. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3456887.3456974
1 RESEARCH BACKGROUND
With the development of the era and the change of information
technology, the way people contact and understand the world is
taking unprecedented changes. The wide application of the Internet
not only facilitates the daily survival activities of human beings, but
also provides great convenience for the spread of various cultures
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CIPAE 2021, May 25–27, 2021, Ottawa, ON, Canada
©2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8996-9/21/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3456887.3456974and thoughts. Many investigations and surveys have found that un-
der the impact of multiculturalism, college students with religious
beliefs are more and more common at present, and there is a certain
rise in some parts. A questionnaire for college students in seven
universities in Jilin in 2010 showed that nearly 10.11% of students
had personal religious beliefs;[1] In 2012, the Humanities and Social
Sciences Research Fund Project Team of the Ministry of Education
charged by Liu Xiulun investigated the religious beliefs of college
students in the southwest, northwest, northeast and east China.
Among the valid questionnaires, 22.3% of college students have
religious beliefs;[2] According to a research report of Tongji Uni-
versity in 2014, 12.5% of subjects had religious beliefs;[3] A survey
conducted by the United Front Work Department of Henan in 2017
showed that nearly 19% of the local college students thought that
they needed religious beliefs. Through various surveys and data
analysis, it can be seen that religion is having an obvious impact
on growing college students.[1]
With the development of material civilization, people’s living stan-
dards have been greatly enriched. However, in terms of spirit, why
do college students turn to religion and seek spiritual sustenance?
This is a phenomenon worthy of reflection by college ideological
and political educators. Xi Jinping once pointed out that to do col-
lege ideological and political work well, we should follow its laws.
Only when we fully and comprehensively understand the essence
of religious psychological function, can we make targeted work
plans and improve the effectiveness of ideological and political
education for college students.
2 AN ANALYSIS OF THE CAUSES OF
COLLEGE STUDENTS’ RELIGIOUS
IDENTITY FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF
PSYCHOLOGY
Religion has emerged thousands of years ago, but it is always
changing. It is undoubtedly very difficult to try to fully grasp its
connotation.[ 4] There are many reasons for college students’ reli-
gious identity. Due to the limited length, this paper only analyzes
the psychological factors. Namely, it explores the causes from cog-
nition, behavior, and emotion from the perspective of psychology.
387CIPAE 2021, May 25–27, 2021, Ottawa, ON, Canada Tao Wei et al.
2.1 Cognitive Level: Religion Satisfies the Need
of College Students to Explain Their
Situation to Some Degree
Cognition refers to the individual’s understanding of himself and
his social environment. College students are in a period of open
mind, rapid development and rapid change of new things. Their
cognitive curiosity and sensitivity to new events in the world are
greater than in any other social groups. They need to form their
understandings to themselves, others, and society, and explain some
phenomena and behaviors in daily life.[5]
From the analysis of the growth of Chinese college student, their
cognition to the world mainly comes from family, school education
and social learning. However, due to the current limitations of
human understanding of the world, science cannot provide all the
answers. When these channels fail to explain something, they begin
to seek other ways (like religion, etc.) to satisfy their cognitive
needs.[ 5] For this, the British philosopher, Bertrand Arthur William
Russell, is also outspoken. "Except for scientific methods, I will
never admit any methods to obtain truth. However, in the realm of
emotion, I do not deny the value of those experiences that produce
religion."[6] This kind of religious theory, based on worship and
belief in supernatural objects, creates a logical illusion that separates
from experience but seems to be rational through the violation of
objective laws and the creation of supernatural miracles. In many
cases, for college students who lack recognizing ability, this false
supernatural logic meets their need to explain situation.
Though religion also has a cognitive function to some degree, its
theoretical foundations is based on the worship and belief of su-
pernatural objects. It takes the will of gods as the highest criterion,
denies the inevitability and regularity of the objective existence, and
provides a kind of unreal and negative false cognition. As Feuerbach
said, "religion is the division between man and himself: He puts a
god opposite as an opposite being. God and man are two extremes:
God is the complete positive and the sum of all realities, while man
is the complete negative and the sum of all nothingness."[7]
2.2 Behavioral Level: Religious Rituals Provide
Seemingly Positive Countermeasures for
College Students in Distress
Religious identity is a process of continuous construction in self-
discovery and self-direction. Among them, the guidance of "inter-
personal network" is the initial medium of identity establishment,
and the personal specific religious experience is its key element.[ 8]
To enhance the inner experience of religious believers, religion
creates various religious symbols and rituals. Believers participate
in various religious activities and rituals as required by rituals.
These rituals include worship, prayer, confession, wishing, spiritual
practice, and cultivation.
Among college students, many of them are full of fear to accidents,
failure, humiliation, death and other negative events. When this
kind of fear cannot be removed, they may produce a strong belief
in immortality and the afterlife. In the religious world, they gain
"eternal life" and "good results" through ritual prayers, confessions
and wishing to gods and supernatural forces. For college students ininner dilemma, the way with religious rituals to comfort themselves
is undoubtedly intuitive and available.
Some other college students who are addicted to religion have psy-
chological conflicts or related diseases, and religious rituals provide
them with a kind of "treatment". Concerning religious rituals from
the perspective of psychology, we have to admit that some ritu-
als themselves do contain certain psychological healing functions.
Even sociologist William James and psychologist Carl Jung can-
not deny these therapeutic effects. In the last 20 years, with the
development of applied psychology, especially the development of
psychological counseling and treatment, many psychologists have
studied the therapeutic effects of religious rituals and confirmed
their real existence. For example, Dr. Jon Kabat-Zinn of the Mind-
fulness Center at MIT has developed mindfulness psychotherapy
from the practice of Buddhist meditation. Its efficacy has received
great scientific empirical support from neuroscience to clinical psy-
chology, and has also been recognized by the National Institutes of
Health (NIH).
Mao Zedong said in the "Investigation Report of Hunan Peasant
Movement" that "theocracy is the rope that binds Chinese."[9] In-
deed, religion has a certain psychological "treatment", which makes
people enter the psychological illusion of getting rid of suffering in
a short period of time. However, the long-term indulgence in this
state of anesthesia and escaping from reality will eventually cause
the loss of individual subjectivity and immerse in the pursuit of the
illusory world on the other world.[10]
2.3 Emotional Level: Religion Provides A
Special Sense of Belonging and Attachment
The American psychologist, Siberia Maslow, proposed the theory of
the hierarchy of human needs in 1943, and was quickly recognized
by the psychological circle. He believes that human needs can be
divided into physiological needs, security needs, love and belonging
needs, respect needs and self-realization needs.[11]
Though human needs are multi-level, the need for love and belong-
ing is undoubtedly very important for growing college students.
Religion has an obvious feature – the group function, which is
mainly manifested in two aspects. The first is the spiritual level,
with the same objects of worship and the same doctrines and pre-
cepts; The second is the formal level, expressed in the same or
similar religious rituals and religious activity scenes. This social
function of group only satisfies the needs of daily religious activities
on the surface, but from a deep level, it actually provides a broad
platform for interpersonal communication. Under the influence of
religious thoughts, these believers regularly gather to worship, com-
municate and discuss, and it is easy to form a seemingly warm and
friendly environment in which they can feel strong "recognition"
and "encouragement".
The conflict between the desire for communication and the lack
of confidants has become one of the main psychological contra-
dictions of present college students. When a person is not loved,
cared for, and does not establish a good intimate relationship with
the surrounding people and environment, he will have a strong
sense of loneliness. If there is no timely psychological counseling,
it is extremely easy to seek support and affirmation from religious
groups.
388The Causes of College Students’ Religious Identity and Countermeasures——Based on Psychology CIPAE 2021, May 25–27, 2021, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Based on the observation of children and ethology, British psy-
chiatrist, Bowlby, integrated psychoanalysis theory, information
processing theory and cybernetics to establish his own attachment
theory. He defined attachment as "the tendency of individuals to
form strong emotional bonds with important others."[12] According
to his theory, the most primitive attachment objects of an individual
are his mothers and fathers. However, with the development of the
individual, the attachment objects may also change, namely, the
original attachment objects are replaced. College students are in an
unstable period of rapid physical and mental development. Due to
accidental factors, religion motivates their specific emotions and
satisfies part of their needs, thus producing religious identity. This
kind of identification is likely to cause the "god" of the individ-
ual and religion to develop into an "attachment relationship." This
relationship directly leads to a more intimate, lasting, and strong
emotional connection between them.[13]
Marx pointed out in the "Introduction to the Critique of Hegel’s
Philosophy of Rights" in 1843 that " religion is the feeling of a heart-
less world, and religion is the opium of the people." Although, to
a certain extent, religion has a positive effect on human psychol-
ogy, it is ultimately a pseudo-science system. If this pseudo-science
system is not identified, it is likely to paralyze people’s emotional
world and even lead to the loss of individual subject personality.
3 COUNTERMEASURES TO PREVENT THE
INFILTRATION OF RELIGIOUS THOUGHTS
IN COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
At the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China,
General Secretary Xi Jinping clearly required our Party to firmly
grasp the leadership of ideological work and fully implement the
Party’s basic policies on religious work. We should adhere to the
Chinese orientation of religion and actively guide religion to adapt
to socialist society. As an important place to train qualified builders
and successors of socialism, colleges and universities are one of
the spiritual highlands guiding the social advanced thought of
society. We should not allow religious thoughts to "flow freely"
here, but should stand in the height of ideological strategic security
and students’ physical and mental health to build colleges and
universities into model places of stability and unity.[ 14] Based on
psychology, colleges and universities can prevent the spread of
religious thoughts from the following aspects.
3.1 Cognitive Level: Actively Conducting the
Education and Guidance of College
Students’ Religious Views to Improve their
Cognitive Ability
Colleges and universities need to fully understand and accurately
judge the influence of religion on the ideological construction of
college students, and combine their advantages in the field of higher
education to change religion into the study of religion.[ 3] We should
actively conduct the education of Marxist religious views, integrate
the emergence, historical development and social influence of re-
ligion into ideological and political education, reveal its essence
and expose the causes of its "mystery". Moreover, we should alsoguide college students to examine religious phenomena scientifi-
cally, treat religious issues rationally and objectively, improve their
cognitive ability to distinguish truth from falsehoods, and guide
them to actively resist the influence of extreme thoughts.
3.2 Behavioral Level: Strictly Controlling
Religious Activities and Forbidding
Missionary Activities on Campus
The "cognitive shortcut" believes that before a person takes a certain
action, if the information available for judgment is relatively vague,
the actor will tend to adopt intuitive thinking to think about the
problem and take action. The widespread spread of religious behav-
ior in daily life will enhance this intuitive processing mode, which
directly causes the group in dilemma to think that religion provides
an easy to learn, time-saving and efficient problem-solving action
strategy. Colleges and universities should improve their religious
management system, establish professional religious management
team, standardize and manage foreign teachers and students with
religious beliefs. It is one of the most direct and effective ways to
prevent religious behaviors on campus from the behavior level and
not allow any opportunity for religious thoughts to infiltrate.
3.3 Emotional Level: Focusing on College
Students’ Mental Health and Enhancing
Psychological Counseling and Intervention
At the National University Ideological and Political Council, Xi
Jinping pointed out to "continuously promote the harmony and
stability of colleges and universities, cultivate a rational and peace-
ful state of mind, and enhance humanistic care and psychological
counseling." Combined with the development laws of college stu-
dents, we should accurately grasp their psychological needs and
internal conflicts at various stages, conduct different psycholog-
ical preventive education timely and purposefully, and improve
their self-exploration skills, psychological adjustment skills and
psychological development skills. In this way, when encountering
psychological problems, they can adjust themselves or seek help,
and solve various potential psychological crisis through scientific
ways and methods; Meanwhile, as the mental health education de-
partment of college students, we should try to improve the quality
of psychological counseling work, and enhance the professional
level of mental health workers. Moreover, we should also expand
the ways of mental health counseling, improve its mode, and en-
hance its experience, interest and effectiveness. In this way, we will
help college students solve various psychological problems in their
growth and guide them to grow up healthily and comprehensively.
REFERENCES
[1]Mo Yueyun, Li Na. Some Issues on Overseas Religious Infiltration and College
Ideological Security. Huxiang Forum, 2014(2).
[2]Liu Xiulun et al. The Present Situation of Contemporary College Students’ Reli-
gious Beliefs and Countermeasures. Heilongjiang Institute of Higher Education,
2103(7).
[3]Liu Qian, Yang Zhenyu. Reasons and Countermeasures of College Students’
Religious Belief under the Background of Religious Infiltration – Taking Tongji
University as an Example. Journal of Chongqing Institute of Socialism, 2014(5).
[4]Yue Zongde. Analysis of College Students’ Religious Belief and Educational
Countermeasures——Based on Surveys of College Students in Henan Province.
The Party Building and Ideological Education of Schools, 2017(03).
389CIPAE 2021, May 25–27, 2021, Ottawa, ON, Canada Tao Wei et al.
[5]Ji Qiwei. Critical Reflection on the Religious Psychological Function of Ideological
and Political Education in Colleges and Universities. Ideological and Political
Education Research, 2016(6).
[6]Lin Xuezhen. Psychological Analysis of Contemporary Chinese Youth. Journal
of Shanxi College for Youth Administrators, 2008(5).
[7][UK] Russell. Religion and Science. Xu Yichun, Lin Guofu(Trans). Beijing: Com-
mercial Press, 2013:110.
[8][German] Feuerbach. The Essence of Christianity. Rong Zhenhua(Trans). Beijing:
Commercial Press, 1984:74.
[9]Shi Zhaoxia. Urban Adolescents’ Parent and Peer Attachment: A Developmental
Perspective. Nanjing: Nanjing Normal University, 2006.
[10] Liang Liping. Chinese Religious Psychology: Theoretical Analysis and Empir-
ical Research on Religious Identity. Beijing: China Social Sciences LiteraturePublishing House, 2004.
[11] Anthology of Marx and Engels (Volume One). Beijing: People’s Publishing House,
1972:2.
[12] Yan Wei, Wei Tao. An Analysis of the Causes of "Psychological Poverty" of
Poor College Students Based on Maslow’s Demand Theory . Journal of Higher
Education, 2015(13).
[13] Mao Zedong. Selected Works of Mao Zedong (Volume One). Beijing: People’s
Publishing House, 1991.
[14] Zheng Yongting. Reflections on Running through the Ideological and Politi-
cal Work of Colleges and Universities in the Whole Process of Education and
Teaching – Learning from General Secretary Xi Jinping’s Speech at the National
Conference on College Ideological and Political Work in Colleges and Universities.
Ideological and Theoretical Education, 2017(1): 4-9.
390