CHI 2020 Workshop Summary
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAWhat’s Race Got To Do With It? 
Engaging in Race in HCI 
Angela D. R. Smith Ihudiya Ogbonnaya-Ogburu 
Northwestern University University of Michigan 
Evanston, IL, USA Ann Arbor, MI, USA 
angelasmith@u.northwestern.edu iogburu@umich.edu 
Alex A. Ahmed Yolanda Rankin 
Northeastern University Florida State University 
Boston, MA, USA Tallahassee, FL, USA 
ahmed.al@husky.neu.edu yrankin@fsu.edu 
Adriana Alvarado Garcia Alexandra To 
Georgia Institute of Technology Carnegie Mellon University 
Atlanta, GA, USA Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
adriana.ag@gatech.edu aato@cs.cmu.edu 
Bryan Dosono Kentaro Toyama 
Airbnb, Inc. University of Michigan 
San Francisco, CA, USA Ann Arbor, MI, USA bryan.dosono@airbnb.com toyama@umich.edu 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). CHI ’20 Extended Abstracts, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA. 
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6819-3/20/04. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3375156 Abstract 
There is an urgent and ongoing need to engage critically 
with race in human-computer interaction. In this workshop, 
we consider two intertwining aspects: ﬁrst, how HCI re-
search and practice should engage with race; second, how 
the HCI community itself can become more racially inclu-
sive and equitable. The workshop offers a safe space for 
HCI scholars and practitioners to discuss how their experi-ences with race and racism impact their research and work 
life. Insights from critical race theory will inform the discus-
sion. Workshop participants will draft a set of guidelines for 
research and a set of recommendations for SIGCHI leader-
ship and the CHI community. 
Author Keywords 
Race; Ethnicity; HCI 
CCS Concepts 
•Social and professional topics → Race and ethnicity; 
Cultural characteristics; 
Introduction 
Historically, the human-computer interaction community has not focused on issues of race and ethnicity. One study ﬁnds 
that out of 13,999 CHI papers between 1981-2016, only 
17 (0.1%) engaged meaningfully with race [5]. Similarly, as a community, we still reﬂect a signiﬁcant racial disparity 
W13, Page 1CHI 2020 Workshop Summary
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAamong current and newly hired faculty and the number of 
students enrolled and awarded a PhD. 
According to the 2018 Taulbee Survey [10] conducted every 
year by the Computing Research Association (CRA), the 
racial background of the current faculty in computer science 
(CS) and computer engineering (CE) departments in the 
United States and Canada is distributed as follows: 58.3% 
are White, 26.7% are Asian, 2.6% are Hispanic, 1.8% are 
Black or African Americans, 0.4% are American Indian or 
Alaska Native, and 0.1% are Native Hawaiian/Paciﬁc Is-
lander. The ethnicity of newly hired faculty reﬂects a very 
similar trend where the majority are White (45.2%), fol-lowed by Asian (25.1%) and Black or African American 
(3%). Lastly, the ethnicity of those who were awarded a 
PhD echo this trend, where the majority are White (27%), 
Asian (5.9%), Black or African American (1.7%), and the 
remainder comprise 2.0%. While these data comprise only 
academic units in the United States and Canada that grant a PhD in CS and CE, they still reﬂect the larger racial dis-
parity in the community that is being established and main-
tained. Similarly, we (the organizers) recognize that since 
we are established in institutions in North America and by 
holding the workshop within the CHI community, we will reach a broad but not the exhaustive HCI global research community. 
Some attempt has been made to address such dispari-
ties. First, there is a growing interest in studying and en-
gaging with race and ethnicity. For example, there is work 
that focuses speciﬁcally on communities of color (e.g., [4, 9]), work that examines and impacts racial bias in technol-
ogy (e.g., [6]), work that illustrates the emotional labor of 
marginalized identities (e.g., [2]), and work that enumerates technologies that have different consequences for people 
of different races [3]. Second, the SIGCHI leadership has begun efforts to address racial disparities in HCI, such as 
with the expansion of the “CHI Women’s Breakfast” to a “Di-
versity and Inclusion Lunch” [8]. 
Y et, these efforts are mere drops in an ocean of what could 
be and must be done. A dramatic effort is required to course-
correct. In addition to research projects that focus on issues 
of race or that focus on particular racial or ethnic groups, 
the work of HCI more broadly has an impact on and impli-
cations for racial disparities [3]. There is a need to critically 
reﬂect on how we as a community engage with race in our 
research and practice, as well as how our own community 
can become racially more inclusive and equitable. 
We propose a one-day workshop to explore issues of race, 
ethnicity, and bias, both in HCI research and in the HCI 
community itself. Our workshop will engage participants who have demonstrated an interest and commitment to en-
gaging meaningfully with issues of race and ethnicity. Our 
broad goal is to create a safe space to engage with the un-
resolved challenges of incorporating and understanding 
race as it relates to our HCI research, practice, and com-
munity. To that end, we will introduce and use concepts from critical race theory to guide our discussion. Critical 
race theory is a framework introduced in the 1970s by legal 
scholars to challenge the dominant discourse on race and 
racism [1]. Among many other contributions, critical race 
theory emphasizes the use of storytelling to elevate stiﬂed voices and explore oppression through counter-narratives 
[1, 7]. We hope to empower our participants to share their 
experience, build a support network for researchers engag-
ing with race, share and build knowledge together from past 
and current work, and share insights and open questions 
with the CHI community. 
W13, Page 2CHI 2020 Workshop Summary
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAWorkshop Goals 
In recent years, ACM SIGCHI has made strides in bolster-
ing inclusion for all, but has made signiﬁcantly less progress 
in addressing how race or the lack of is prevalent in our re-
search and community. Our workshop will support 25-30 
participants across various topical and methodological ar-
eas of research, design, and practice. Broadly, our goals 
are to help facilitate the difﬁcult discussion of engaging race 
and racism within our community and research, but also to 
build support networks in an ever-growing CHI community. We outline below our speciﬁc goals. 
Workshop Goals 
• Provide a safe space for racial minorities to share 
experiences through small group activities. 
• Transfer knowledge and experiences from past and 
ongoing research and/or experiences to inform cur-
rent and future research goals as well as best prac-
tices when engaging with non-majority populations. 
• Identify the conditions in our research environment 
that prevent us as a community to engage with race. 
• Identify the unresolved challenges that researchers 
continue to struggle with and explore options for re-sponding to these challenges. 
• Discuss sustainable solutions and draft a practical 
zine that reﬂects the breadth and depth of racial is-sues in emerging HCI research to help foster true 
inclusion. 
• Create a list of actionable items for the CHI commu-
nity to urge change in more proactive measures. Post-Workshop Goals 
At the conclusion of our workshop, we hope to use the infor-
mation we gathered and obtained to: 
• Finalize and publish a zine of best practices for en-
gaging with non-majority populations. 
• Share recommendations with SIGCHI leadership and 
CHI conference participants. 
• Provoke discussion with the broader HCI community 
via accessible publications: e.g., an Interactions Mag-azine piece, a Medium blog post, or a website. 
Logistics 
Website 
A website, https://sites.google.com/view/raceinhci , will be used 
to solicit submissions for the workshop and serve as a 
repository for materials. This will include the Call for Par-
ticipation, resources, schedule adjustments, accepted sub-missions, and post-workshop reports. Due to the sensitive 
nature of participants’ submissions, accepted participants 
have several options in sharing their submissions: partici-
pants can choose to have their submissions stored on our 
website (publicly accessible), participants can choose to share their submissions solely with workshop participants, 
or participants can choose to not share their submissions 
at all - however, submissions will be reviewed among the 
workshop organizers to deem if participant is a good ﬁt for 
the workshop. 
Recruitment 
We will promote the workshop through the formal CHI web-
site and registration, as well as a variety of social media 
channels (Facebook groups, Twitter, and listservs), and by contacting researchers who have expressed interest in this 
topic. 
W13, Page 3CHI 2020 Workshop Summary
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USASubmissions 
Position papers should be up to 6 pages in the ACM Ex-
tended Abstract format and should take a position on race 
and racism in HCI. Submissions could include past and current research that engages race, reﬂections on the re-
search process or lessons learned, or emergent challenges 
with this subject matter. More importantly, position pa-
pers should reﬂect participants’ desire to engage with race 
thoughtfully in future research design and practices or par-ticipants’ experiences interacting with the CHI commu-
nity. Position papers are not limited to these subjects, and 
broader discussions of race in the HCI domain are encour-
aged. 
Review 
Submissions will be reviewed by the workshop organizers 
for relevance to the workshop, demonstrated experience 
with matters of race, and expressed support for racial inclu-
sion and equity. If the number of applicants exceeds work-shop capacity, acceptance decisions will be made on the 
basis of these criteria. 
Materials 
This workshop will require tables and chairs for 30 partic-
ipants and organizers with 6-8 participants per table; a 
microphone for accessibility; a projector and a projection 
screen (optional but encouraged if the room has it); easel 
pads; and supplies for collaborative brainstorming and par-ticipatory design activities (markers, pens, sticky notes, 
notebooks, newspapers, old magazines, construction pa-
per, scissors, glue sticks). Workshop Structure 
Pre-Workshop Accepted participants will be supplied with a suggested 
reading list that provides an introduction to critical race the-
ory and its applications. 
Workshop 
The workshop will be structured with two overall goals for 
the participants (as seen in Table 1). At the beginning of 
the workshop, attendees will be welcomed and ground 
rules will be established to facilitate honest conversations about research and practice of HCI as it relates to ethnic-ity and race. We will provide a summary to participants 
of the key submission areas and an overview of theories 
that involve race and ethnicity (e.g., critical race theory). 
As a group, participants will reﬂect on current and future 
research practices surrounding race and ethnicity in HCI. Participants will take part in creating pieces of a zine that 
illustrate tips, tricks, and best practices when conducting 
research in these spaces. 
During the afternoon portion of the session, participants 
will join in a participatory design session geared to focus on 
race and ethnicity as it relates to the SIGCHI community. Through our discussions throughout the day, both the or-
ganizers and participants will add sticky notes to the easel 
pads identifying key challenges and issues in the SIGCHI 
community. We will work in small groups employing a “what 
if” design process to create solutions that would be useful for the broader CHI community. 
Conclusion 
Post-workshop follow-up is pivotal to fostering change within 
the HCI community and each person’s individual learning 
and working environments. During the course of the work-
shop, we intend to work with participants to begin moving 
W13, Page 4CHI 2020 Workshop Summary
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USATime Activity 
9:00-9:30am Welcome and Introduction 
9:30-10:00am Participant Lightning Talks 
10:00-10:30am Morning Break 
10:30-11:00am Summary of Workshop Proposal 
(Challenges and Opportunities) 
11:00am-12:00pm Group Work (Best Practices Zine) 
12:00pm-1:00pm Lunch Break 
1:00-2:30pm Group Discussion (Best Practices 
Zine) 
2:30-3:00pm Afternoon Break 
3:00-4:30pm Group Work (Diversity at CHI) 
4:30-5:30pm Conclusion 
Table 1: Workshop Schedule 
the needle in our efforts to address and incorporate race 
into our day to day conversations. We intend to highlight 
the signiﬁcance of these discussions by identifying the chal-
lenges and missed opportunities by not including race as a factor in our work as HCI scholars and practitioners. 
These efforts will allow us to continue the same momentum 
by ﬁrst taking care of our participants. We want to continue to be a place where our participants can not only continu-
ally reference for ideas, methodologies, research questions, 
and challenges, but also seek encouragement and support 
from their peers. We imagine disseminating additional re-
sources through our website, a publicly accessible domain, 
and creating a communication channel for quicker, casual exchanges. 
Lastly, we will share our concerns and conversations with 
the CHI community. In order to create and sustain change, 
we need to introduce our discussions, ﬁndings, and solu-tions with the broader community to continue the conver-sation. We will share our zine so scholars who are not cur-
rently engaged with race or its importance in research have 
a foundation of how to begin asking certain questions. Con-
versely, scholars who are engaged with these topics will 
have a reference to return to for other considerations. 
Organizers 
The organizers come from a variety of backgrounds and 
hold a range of positions of privilege and marginalization 
both in HCI-speciﬁc contexts as well as more broadly in 
our lives. Relevant to this workshop, we disclose that we 
include African American and Black women, a Hispanic 
woman from Mexico, Asian and Asian American individuals, 
and mixed race individuals. 
Angela D. R. Smith is a PhD student at Northwestern Uni-
versity in the Technology & Social Behavior program. She 
uses qualitative approaches to investigate how homeless 
youth characterize and operationalize technology while car-
rying out speciﬁc practices of the organization. 
Alex A. Ahmed is a sixth-year PhD Candidate in Personal 
Health Informatics at Northeastern University. Her research 
focuses on community-based design and critically examin-ing existing design practices and artifacts. 
Adriana Alvarado Garcia is a third-year PhD student at 
Georgia Institute of Technology. Using a mix-methods ap-
proach, she designs contextualized technologies that sup-
port social media data migration from online to ofﬂine con-
text to account for data gaps, and advocate for human 
rights in the context of Latin America. 
Bryan Dosono, PhD, is an Experience Researcher at 
Airbnb. His dissertation research uncovered ways in which 
Asian Americans and Paciﬁc Islanders negotiate collec-
W13, Page 5CHI 2020 Workshop Summary
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAtive action in the context of their online identity work. He 
received his PhD from Syracuse University. 
Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya-Ogburu is a third year PhD 
student at the School of Information University of Michigan. 
Her research focuses on the digital literacy development of 
individuals in a resource-constrained context. 
Yolanda A. Rankin, PhD, is an Assistant Professor in the 
School of Information at Florida State University. As a Black 
woman in HCI, she conducts research that utilizes intersec-
tionality as a critical framework for understanding people’s 
lived experiences and designing technology for marginal-
ized populations. 
Alexandra To is a PhD Candidate at Carnegie Mellon Uni-
versity in the Human-Computer Interaction Institute. She 
incorporates a racial justice and critical race frame in her research work. Her thesis focuses on empowering people 
in marginalized positions and includes work on coping after 
racist experiences. 
Kentaro Toyama, PhD, is the W. K. Kellogg Professor of 
Community Information at the University of Michigan School 
of Information. He conducts research on ways in which dig-
ital technologies can and cannot support socio-economic 
development in resource-constrained communities. 
Call for Participation 
Historically, the human-computer interaction community has not focused on issues of race and ethnicity. In recent years, 
there has been a growing trickle of interest in studying and 
engaging with race and ethnicity, but much more must be done. 
We invite participants interested in critically engaging with 
race and racial diversity in HCI. Our workshop seeks to pro-vide a safe space for HCI scholars and practitioners to pro-
ductively discuss their experiences with race and racism, 
and how they have impacted their research, work-life, and 
career. We will accomplish this through intentional facilita-tion and community agreements. The workshop has two 
goals: to identify better practices for research that en-
gages with race and to identify ways in which the HCI 
community can improve its own inclusiveness and eq-
uity with respect to race. 
Anyone with an interest in the topic of race and HCI is wel-
come, regardless of racial background, disciplinary back-
ground, experience, or research engagement. If you have the interest, you have something to contribute! 
To apply, please submit the following two things: (1) a brief 
statement about what your commitment to support the workshop‘s goals before or after the workshop itself (see 
examples below); and (2) a position statement of up to 6 
pages in length in the CHI Extended Abstract format (see 
potential topics below). References do not count towards 
the page limit. Please refer to the ACM website for the ex-
tended abstract template. Submit your document as a PDF , referring to the SIGACCESS guidelines to ensure accessi-
bility. 
Submit your materials to the organizing committee via email 
at raceinHCI@gmail.com. The deadline for submissions to 
this workshop is 12:00 pm (noon) Paciﬁc Time on Febru-
ary 11, 2020. Participants will be notiﬁed of acceptance by 
12:00 pm (noon) Paciﬁc Time on February 28, 2020. Sub-
missions will be shared internally among workshop organiz-ers. 
Participants will be selected on the basis of the quality of 
their position paper. Accepted submissions, with author permission, will also be posted to the workshop website. 
W13, Page 6CHI 2020 Workshop Summary
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAAt least one author of each accepted position paper must 
attend the workshop, and all participants must register for 
both the workshop and for at least one day of the confer-
ence. The organizing committee can be contacted via email to answer relevant questions. 
Please ﬁnd examples of prompts for a position paper below. 
As a note, this is not an exhaustive list of possibilities, if you 
have questions regarding your idea or want to dive a bit 
deeper, feel free to contact us. We are interested in seeing 
your demonstrated ability to connect with the topic area and 
ability to meaningfully engage in a workshop setting. 
• Share a case study in your previous or current re-
search in which you designed to include race in your 
research, including key successes or failures. 
• Share a reﬂection on how you feel your race has 
been overlooked or hypersensitized, either in your 
research or learning and working spaces. • Share a personal story that expounds upon your ex-
periences with race in HCI that relies on one of vari-ous key methodologies of Critical Race Theory (e.g., 
storytelling) or other relevant theories of race. 
• Share a critical perspective on the importance of ex-
amining race in HCI spaces. 
• Share a review of race-related research from relevant 
research communities. 
• Share a review of race-related theories or methods 
from relevant research communities. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank Sarita Y ardi Schoenebeck for her early feedback on this workshop proposal. 
W13, Page 7CHI 2020 Workshop Summary
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USAReferences 
[1] Richard Delgado and Jean Stefancic. 2017. Critical 
race theory: An introduction. Vol. 20. NYU Press. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1ggjjn3 
[2] Bryan Dosono and Bryan Semaan. 2019. Moderation 
practices as emotional labor in sustaining online 
communities: The case of AAPI identity work on 
Reddit. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’19). 
ACM, Article 142, 13 pages. 
https://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3290605.3300372 
[3] David Hankerson, Andrea R. Marshall, Jennifer 
Booker, Houda El Mimouni, Imani Walker, and 
Jennifer A. Rode. 2016. Does technology have race?. 
In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
ACM, 473–486. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2892578 
[4] Christopher A. Le Dantec and Sarah Fox. 2015. 
Strangers at the gate: Gaining access, building 
rapport, and co-constructing community-based 
research. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference 
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing. ACM, 1348–1358. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675147 
[5] Ari Schlesinger, W. Keith Edwards, and Rebecca E. 
Grinter. 2017. Intersectional HCI: Engaging identity 
through gender, race, and class. In Proceedings of the 
2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. ACM, 5412–5427. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025766 [6] Ari Schlesinger, Kenton P . O’Hara, and Alex S. Taylor. 
2018. Let’s talk about race: Identity, chatbots, and AI. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 315. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173889 
[7] Daniel G. Solórzano and Tara J. Y osso. 2002. Critical 
race methodology: Counter-storytelling as an analytical framework for education research. 
Qualitative inquiry 8, 1 (2002), 23–44. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/107780040200800103 
[8] Angelika Strohmayer, Rosanna Bellini, Janis Meissner, 
Samantha Mitchell Finnigan, Ebtisam Alabdulqader, 
Austin Toombs, and Madeline Balaam. 2018. 
#CHIversity: Implications for equality, diversity, and 
inclusion campaigns. In Extended Abstracts of the 
2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. ACM, Article alt03, 10 pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3188396 
[9] Jasper Tran O’Leary, Sara Zewde, Jennifer Mankoff, 
and Daniela K. Rosner. 2019. Who gets to future?: 
Race, representation, and design methods in 
Africatown. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
ACM, 561. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300791 
[10] Stuart Zweben and Betsy Bizot. 2019. 2018 Taulbee 
Survey. Computing Research Association (2019). 
https://cra.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/ 
2018_Taulbee_Survey.pdf 
W13, Page 8