Pakistani Teens and Privacy - How Gender Disparities, Religion
and Family Values Impact the Privacy Design Space
Maryam Mustafa
Computer Science, Lahore University
of Management Sciences
Pakistan
maryam_mustafa@lums.edu.pkAbdul Moeed Asad
Purdue University
U.S.A
21100071@lums.edu.pkShehrbano Hassan
Digital Rights Foundation
Pakistan
shehrbanohassan@live.com
Urooj Haider
Computer Science, Lahore University
of Management Sciences
Pakistan
22100091@lums.edu.pkZainab Durrani
Digital Rights Foundation
Pakistan
zainab@digitalrightsfoundation.pkKatharina Krombholz:
CISPA Helmholtz Center for
Information Security
Germany
krombholz@cispa.de
ABSTRACT
The understanding of how teenagers perceive, manage and per-
form privacy is less well-understood in spaces outside of Western,
educated, industrialised, rich and democratic countries.
To fill this gap we interviewed 30 teens to investigate the privacy
perceptions, practices, and experienced digital harms of young peo-
ple in Pakistan, a particularly interesting context as privacy in this
context is not seen as an individual right or performed within an in-
dividualistic framework but instead is influenced by a combination
of factors including social norms, family dynamics and religious
beliefs.
Based on our findings, we developed four personas to systematize
the needs and values of this specific population and then conducted
focus groups with co-design activities to further explore privacy
conflicts. Among other things that confirm and extend existing
theories on teen’s privacy practices and perceptions, our findings
suggest that young women are disproportionately impacted by pri-
vacy violations and the harms extend beyond themselves to include
their families.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Security and privacy →Human and societal aspects of se-
curity and privacy.
KEYWORDS
privacy, adolescents
ACM Reference Format:
Maryam Mustafa, Abdul Moeed Asad, Shehrbano Hassan, Urooj Haider,
Zainab Durrani, and Katharina Krombholz:. 2023. Pakistani Teens and
Privacy - How Gender Disparities, Religion and Family Values Impact
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark
©2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0050-7/23/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3576915.3623087the Privacy Design Space. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC Con-
ference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS ’23), November
26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3576915.3623087
1 INTRODUCTION
Research shows that adolescents are going online at increasingly
younger ages [ 24,64] and as a consequence are exposed to online
harms and privacy breaches at younger ages. Additionally, a lack of
technical, critical and social skills (e.g. ability to deal with cruelty,
meanness and peer pressure in online spaces) often put young
people at a greater risk of experiencing harms online [ 35]. While in
recent years a great deal of research has focused on investigating
teens privacy perceptions [ 13,17,26,64,71] much of this work
has focused on WEIRD (western, educated, industrialized, rich and
democratic) populations.
While there is a growing body of work that explores the dig-
ital security and privacy experiences of adult users that do not
belong to WEIRD populations [ 55–57], the privacy behaviours and
perceptions of adolescents in the Global South are under-explored
and under-represented. To fill this gap, we followed an inducted
approach and conducted qualitative interviews with 30 and focus
groups with 15 Pakistani adolescents between the ages of 13 to 19
to explore experienced privacy harms, perceptions and practices.
Pakistan is particularly interesting in that it is one of five countries
with the largest population in the world and the largest percentage
of it’s population consists young people [ 23]. Currently, 64% of the
population is younger than 30, 29% of Pakistanis are between 15
and 29 and this number is expected to continue to increase until at
least 2050 [ 5]. It is therefore increasingly important to understand
the privacy needs, behaviours and aspirations of this large number
of users with hyper internet penetration, and increased and varied
online activities [ 30]. The Pakistani context and the relationships
young people have with parents is also interesting in that Pak-
istan is a religious, conservative, predominantly Muslim context
with parental restrictions on dating, the free mixing of genders,
exploring gender identities and an emphasis on family respect and
honour [59].
Our findings reveal specific privacy harms experienced by partic-
ipants online and the deeply gendered impact of these harms. In the
195CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark Maryam Mustafa et al.
conservative context of Pakistan, our data reveals the severe and
often collective consequences female participants and their families
face in terms of reputational harm, feelings of shame and loss of
social standing if female users are seen to engage online in ways
considered culturally unacceptable. In contrast, male participants
do not experience similar consequences and do not face direct ma-
terial harms like loss of access to digital spaces. Similarly, we find
participants experience conflicting and varied pressures of societal,
parental, religious and peer expectations of online behaviours and
their digital identities, forcing them to adopt complex mechanisms
like multiple accounts, limited lists, self-censorship amongst others
to carve out independent digital spaces for themselves.
It is in this complex context that we seek to analyse the privacy
perceptions, harms as a result of privacy breaches and privacy pre-
serving behaviours of teens. We situate our findings in the privacy
as vulnerability framework [ 44] and highlight the challenges in
analysing the privacy practices of our participants from the lens
of a contextual integrity framework [48]. Nissenbaum’s theory of
contextual integrity [ 48], is based on the appropriate flow of infor-
mation. The propriety of an informational flow is decided based
on context. If in that transfer of information there is a breach in
cultural, ethical or moral norms then it is considered a breach in pri-
vacy. While it is important to understand the norms when designing
for privacy, Mcdonald and Forte emphasize the shortcomings of
exclusively depending on norms as an analytical instrument [ 44].
Centering the norms ignores the privacy concerns of vulnerable
populations who are not the dominant class/gender/ethnicity in de-
termining the norms but are often forced to visibly perform them in
online spaces. This is particularly true in contexts with significant
power differentials like Pakistan where class, gender and parental
influence play a significant role. Our work therefore, explores the
following RQs:
(1)What are the risks, harms and privacy perceptions of teenagers
in religious, conservative Pakistan?
(2)How do young people navigate online harms and protect
themselves in digital spaces?
(3)How might we think about privacy design in non-WEIRD
cultural contexts to protect young people?
2 RELATED WORK
In this section we map out some of the most relevant existing liter-
ature on privacy perceptions, practices, and harms. In highlighting
this work, we aim to build on it, identify the unique constraints
and vulnerabilities of young people in the Pakistani context.
We first detail and highlight the unique constraints and cultural
context of Pakistan that might impact young people’s privacy be-
liefs and behaviors (Section 2.1), followed by summarising prior
work on young people’s privacy experiences and coping mecha-
nisms (Section 2.2), gendered privacy (Section 2.3) and religious
values and privacy (Section 2.4). Our literature review focuses on
gender and religion as these emerge as the dominant values in the
Pakistani social social context, influencing perceptions, behaviors,
and societal norms [20].2.1 Cultural Context
Pakistan is deeply religious, conservative, and patriarchal, operating
primarily on notions of community, family honour and piety [ 20].
Islamic principles and customs are deeply influential to social, legal,
and political practices in both urban and rural areas. Islam is the
state religion, with approximately 95-98 percent of people identify-
ing as Muslim. Patriarchy is also deep rooted within Pakistan, with
women regularly facing discrimination, inequality, exploitation,
harassment, and violence in their daily lives. Pakistan ranks 153 out
of 156 countries in terms of gender parity in economic participation
and opportunity, educational attainment, health, and survival and
finally, political empowerment [ 61]. Gender segregation is com-
monly imposed in public spaces to prevent interaction between
men and women. The Pakistani social context revolves around fam-
ily and community [ 38]. Loss of honour is a great source of shame,
resulting in social ostracization and economic deprivation of entire
families [45].
2.2 Young people and Privacy
In recent years, the number of children using digital devices, such
as smartphones and tablets, at an early age has grown exponen-
tially [ 24]. Prior work reveals that young people can articulate pri-
vacy risks such as oversharing or revealing personal identities that
relate to their own person but are less aware of more abstract risks
such as tracking, promotions or surveillance [ 50,65,75]. Factors
contributing to teens privacy practices are friends’ privacy settings,
type of contacts, specific privacy concerns, past experiences and
the presence of parental restrictions or surveillance. Studies suggest
that teenagers may be uniquely prone to (and willing to) engaging
in risky behaviours on social media [ 27,47]. This suggests that
while young people are deeply influenced by social relations and
context to engage in specific privacy ensuring behaviours, their
social environment also influences their chances of engaging neg-
atively with the online space. Privacy, therefore, is configured by
social relations and context, making it a social norm that dictates
practice in different ways.
Teens who use social networking sites like Instagram, Face-
book, Twitter, and Snapchat are also at an increased risk of poten-
tial harms like information leakages [ 36], sexual solicitations [ 53],
cyber-bullying [ 28] and exposure to pornography, violence or other
explicit content [ 37]. One study exploring experiences of teens
reported 207 separate risk events including information breaches,
online harassment, sexual solicitations, and exposure to explicit
content [ 72]. Other work also highlights several variables in young
people’s internet use including the risk of cyberbullying, online
abuse, and access to negative content [ 70]. Much of this research on
categorizing the online risks the teens face, their coping strategies,
their experiences and understanding of harm and their privacy pre-
serving strategies are with participants from either the US or the
EU. There is little data that can help us as privacy researchers under-
stand how online harms andrisks are understood and experienced
by teens outside of the Global North and how might we design
better technologies to protect and empower diverse populations of
young people.
2.2.1 Privacy in the Global South. While there are a few studies
that have expanded the scope of privacy research beyond the Global
196Pakistani Teens and Privacy - How Gender Disparities, Religion and Family Values Impact the Privacy Design Space CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark
North, they have predominantly been with adults [ 12,56,57]. How
privacy is perceived and enacted has been understood by HCI re-
searchers to vary across cultures. For example Vashistha et al’s.
analyses of 114 publications on privacy and security reveals culture,
knowledge gaps, unintended technology use, context, and usability
and cost considerations as primary factors shaping security and
privacy preferences of people in developing regions like Pakistan
[67]. Our own work focuses on context and culture to reveal privacy
behaviours of adolescents.Specifically, in our work we reveal how
patriarchal, collectivist, religious and conservative structures influ-
ence how adolescence perceive and manage privacy in Pakistan.
Prior work in South Asia has highlighted the nuanced differences in
how privacy is often considered in collective terms encompassing
the family or the community [34, 67].
2.3 Gendered Privacy
Most previous studies exploring privacy behaviours, perceptions
and harms have focused predominantly on cis-women, often low-
income and low-literate [ 7,56]. Much of this work explores the
ways and means women use to carve out privacy in new ways,
particularly on shared or monitored phones [ 6,29,57]. In their
cross-country analysis on specific gendered online risks, harms and
abuse, Sambasivan et al. reveal that a majority of participants (out
of 205) frequently experienced online harms such as cyberstalking,
impersonating, leaking of information [56]. The consequences for
women in this study including reputation damage and emotion,
physical and sexual violence. Kovacs found that the fear of damag-
ing ones reputation is a common factor in limiting gender-equitable
participation in South Asia [ 33]. Our study also explores the gen-
dered understanding of privacy but amongst teenagers in Pakistan.
Unlike participants in previous studies based in South Asia, our
participants must also navigate boundaries and expectations set
by parents or extended family members, peer pressure and the ex-
pectations of creating specific digital personas and having a digital
identity. While prior research reveals that women in South Asia
engage in unique strategies to ensure their privacy in the context
of gender inequalities and consequent surveillance by using app
locks,private mode and technological avoidance [ 21,29], there is
little understanding of how teenagers (young men and women both)
might also negotiate gender inequalities.
2.4 Religion and Privacy
Recent scholarship from Pakistan and Bangladesh has recognized
religion in understanding sociocultural norms and values [ 2,15,
51,52]. In the context of the subcontinent, the concept of religious
‘piety’ is of particular importance as it informs key norms around
privacy and surveillance for practicing Muslims. An important and
sacred concept for Muslims in the region is that of the Purdah
(or veil) for Muslims [ 51]. The Purdah is a religious and social
practice that limits the interaction of men and women to select
circumstances according to religious rules. It represents modesty
and directs the social segregation of genders which often is also
practiced in digital spaces.
Our work builds on this literature to understand the unique
socio-cultural factors that impact young people’s privacy concernsLahore Bahawalpur Karachi Misc.
Gender Female(14),
Male(7)Female(1),
Male(1)Female(2),
Male(1)Female(0),
Male(4)
Age Min:13,
Avg:6Min:15,
Avg:15Min:16,
Avg:15Min:14,
Avg:16
Table 1: Demographics of 33 participants across different
cities of Pakistan. Misc. refers to smaller cities.
Figure 1: Methodology visualization highlighting the sources
of data, analysis methods and outputs.
and behaviours in Pakistan. Young people’s mental models of tech-
nology and digital privacy are under-studied outside of the Global
North. We fill this gap to explore the tensions young people in a
restrictive context must navigate including but not limited to their
religious beliefs, familial expectations and surveillance, broader
societal expectations and peer pressure to maintain digital iden-
tities and navigate digital spaces safely but also freely. We focus
particularly on highlighting the norms that determine participants
behaviours along with context, relying on both the contextual in-
tegrity framework [ 48] where adequate protection for privacy is
tied to norms of specific contexts, but also focusing on vulnerabili-
ties and highlighting the power differentials in the setting of norms
that impact our participants [44].
3 METHODOLOGY
We conducted 30 interviews with teenagers over the course of
a year in Pakistan (Table.1) and focus group discussions (FGDs)
with 15 teenagers across four sessions. Semi-structured interviews
followed a short pre-screening survey (Table.1), were chosen to un-
pack detailed experiences and stories of privacy violations, harms,
behaviours and fears (Table. 1). In particular, due to the sensitive na-
ture of some experiences of harm we wanted to build rapport with
participants, to ensure they feel safe, are comfortable and can then
share valuable experiences with us of their experiences of privacy
197CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark Maryam Mustafa et al.
harms, fears, mitigating behaviours and concerns. To respect cul-
tural norms and establish participant comfort, all male participants
were interviewed by male researchers and female participants by
female researchers.
The focus group discussions were also conducted over zoom and
involved activities designed to help us better crystallize and under-
stand user-centered design for privacy and security in non-WEIRD
context’s and with/for young people. These sessions helped elicit
user privacy aspirations and conceptual ideas but also helped us
explore salient characteristics of our persona’s (Table.2 that lead to
specific behaviours. Participatory design approaches to understand-
ing user-centered privacy and security design have recently been
used to explore and scope the design space for usable security [ 16].
All activities were done remotely over zoom because of the global
pandemic to comply with regulations at the time and for the sake
of safety of the researchers and participants.
3.1 Recruitment
Our work is in collaboration with a non-profit advocacy and digi-
tal rights organization (Digital Rights Foundation, DRF) focusing
on ICTs to support human rights, democratic processes and social
justice in Pakistan. DRF has a significant presence in the field and
led the data collection process. Participants were recruited through
their networks and online student communities (Facebook, Twitter
and Instagram). In an effort to balance the gender of our partici-
pants, we randomly contacted an equal number of male and female
participants from the 71 responses to our call for participation. We
conducted a total of 30 (13 M, 17 F) interviews1. To be included
in our research, participants had to be teenagers i.e. between the
ages of 13 and 19. IRB approval from the University review board
was obtained for this study and parental consent was obtained for
all participants below 18 years of age, while participants above 18
consented themselves. The participants were compensated with
PKR 1500 (a little over USD $9) for their time. The incentives were
ethically determined through our community organization partner
that has experience and specializes in working with our target pop-
ulations to ensure compensation was not perceived as coercive or
inappropriate.
3.2 Interview Protocol
Our interview protocol explored interpersonal privacy and safety
concerns, perceived risks, experienced harms, online fears and
mechanisms to enact safe spaces, boundaries and navigate online
spaces by teens in our context. Our interview protocol was based on
the sixteen privacy concerns explored in earlier work [ 22] based on
data gathered from 10 developed and emerging economies. These
sixteen concerns broadly related to 1) Concerns about actions that
other people might take toward someone in the app, (2) concerns
related to how apps are seen to collect and use data, and (3) concerns
related to who has access to information the app is seen to know
about people. These concerns and braoder categories helped us
craft questions for our interview protocol2.
1No participant identified as non-binary at any stage of the study. We asked participants
twice, during the initial call and later in the interviews
2For details of protocol please see appendix https://rb.gy/6tqt1We opened each interview with open-ended questions about
participants’ conception of privacy and provided them with no prior
definition of privacy. Each interview was conducted over zoom and
we acquired parental or participant consent prior to the interview
with a consent form, participants were also asked to consent to
the recording and use of the data at the start of each interview.
The mean time for the 30 interviews was 48 minutes (median 47
minutes) and the interview time ranged between 20 minutes to 1 hr
and 28 minutes. Interviews were conducted in a mix of Urdu (local
language) and English (participants were educated and comfortable
in speaking both languages). It is very common in Pakistan that
Urdu and English are mixed. We continued to interview untill
saturation was reached i.e. no new insights, experiences, harms
emerged leading to a total of 30 interviews.
3.3 Focus Group Discussion
The focus groups followed the interviews and were designed to
explore actual behaviours while the interviews focused on expe-
rienced harms, privacy perceptions and beliefs. Focus group dis-
cussions happened within three months of the semi-structured
interviews. 15 participants aged between 14 and 19 participated in
the discussion. The focus groups were action oriented with partici-
pants performing specific tasks. Task 1 focused on privacy concerns
on social media while Task 2 focused on posting behaviours of per-
sonas. Data from the semi-structured interviews was used to create
the personas and the focus groups tasks validated these personas
by asking participants to predict posting behaviours based on pre-
sented persona’s. Our personas were made to capture the diversity
of personality traits of participants from our interviews. All in-
terviews and focus group sessions were conducted on Zoom and
the focus group activities were done using figjam, an online col-
laborative digital whiteboard. The ideas were generated as digital
‘sticky-notes’ or cards (we will be referring to these artefacts as dig-
ital sticky-notes or cards interchangeably through out this paper),
and were preserved as design artefacts for analysis in this study.
In keeping with cultural norms and in an effort to produce a
safe space for participants, the workshops were gender separated;
we had two focus group sessions for boys and two for girls with
a total of four sessions. An FGD was conducted over a single day
and the sessions were recorded with the consent of the participants.
The activities were conducted using figjam, an online collaborative
digital whiteboard and zoom, an internet conferencing tool for
sharing video and voice.
Before the FGDs, participants were emailed what they would
be doing at the session and at the start of each discussion partici-
pants were briefed on the structure of the study and had concerns
addressed by the second (for male groups) or the fourth author (for
female groups). To get comfortable with the other participants and
get accustomed to the white-boarding software, the sessions started
with a ice breaking activity. We conducted two major activities to
understand factors mediating disclosure among teens and the asso-
ciated perceived privacy risks with social networking sites (SNS).
In both activities we used card sorting led by the participants to
avoid assigning judgement-laden labels ourselves when drawing
conclusions from the design artefacts.
198Pakistani Teens and Privacy - How Gender Disparities, Religion and Family Values Impact the Privacy Design Space CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark
The data generated needed minimal processing because the data
was categorized during the activity by the participants.
3.4 Data Analysis
All interviews were translated into English in transcription and in
combination with the transcripts, low inference notes were taken
during the interviews for the researchers to reference during the
analysis process. The transcripts were subsequently analyzed using
open coding as described by Strauss and Corbin [ 63]. Two authors
coded the raw data [ 54], one male and one female, both of whom
are computer scientists and Pakistani. These were then reviewed by
a third author also a computer scientist and Pakistani. Discrepan-
cies were resolved and the data was iteratively coded. We focused
on access, number of devices, number of years of usage, privacy
behaviours, threats and experienced harms, privacy knowledge and
fears. The three authors then collectively grouped the codes into
categories (axial coding, also following the approach by Strauss and
Corbin) [ 68] together under key themes and constructed personas.
The resulting codebook revealed themes like privacyimportance,
social media usage, online harassment, privacy violations, privacy
definition etc.
For our FGDs, we used card sorting and the categorization made
by the participants. To make sense of themes across sessions, we
interpreted similarly labeled themes as part of the same idea. Such
categorizations include ‘personal development’ and ‘learning’ or
‘news’ and ’updates’. We then counted the frequency within each
category and further analysis was informed by our framework
developed after the thematic analysis of the in-depth interviews.
4 FINDINGS
We present key findings from our qualitative interviews organizing
them under three main themes: 1) Privacy Perceptions and experi-
enced harms, 2) Key constructs impacting privacy, and 3) privacy
practices to navigate 2. We also briefly discuss participants aspira-
tions and desires with respect to privacy features (see appendix for
codebook).
4.1 Privacy Perceptions and Experienced Harms
To understand the privacy perceptions of our teenagers we asked
them what ’privacy’ meant to them. The code book revealed par-
ticipants framed privacy by referring to their personal beliefs and
real life experiences. When asked what they thought privacy was,
many drew parallels to their offline lives, referencing enclosed
physical spaces and physical solitude where the presence of any
person across a certain personal boundary without consent counts
as intrusion and a breach of privacy.
Privacy in the physical space is of particular importance in our
context given that often in Pakistan large extended families live
together and privacy is thought of in collective terms and not indi-
vidually. [ 67]. For our participants, privacy meant having a personal
inner space free from intrusion from their parents or peers. They
were cognizant of who might access their sensitive information
such as personal photos, conversations or location. Our data reveals
that young people think of privacy within an individual framework.
This is also different from prior work in the Global South where
most adults conceive of privacy as a collective and not an individualright [ 58]. Mentally, they perceive privacy as something that can
be achieved beyond family or social structures to only be about
them as individuals. However, our findings reveal that while this
maybe the desire and mental model of young people, their concerns
determine their practice of privacy to be centred on the collective,
specifically their family. Participants, when asked to explain what
they would not be comfortable sharing online, often included their
family members into that sacred space of protection and security
along with their individual content.
Similarly, while female participants revealed family restrictions
on their usage, they still conformed to the accepted privacy norms
where family is considered within the private sphere. This finding
aligns with cultural expectations in Pakistan, where individualism
within a family is often considered offensive and familial relations
form the basis of a person’s identity [38].
4.1.1 Privacy Harms. To understand what are considered privacy
violations for teens, we asked participants to share their experi-
ences, who shared, heard or experienced privacy violations. Par-
ticipants also discussed their fears/concerns with respect to digital
privacy violations. The specified violations varied in severity for
male and female participants. These included but were not limited
to identity theft, leaked personal chats, unwanted direct messages,
non-consensual addition to online social groups, tags by random
profiles on inappropriate content, non-consensual use of pictures,
blackmail and threats to leak specific images.
This is different from the experiences of adult low-literate users
in the Global South as reported in earlier studies where identity
theft, leaked personal photos and non-consensual addition to groups
has not been reported as privacy breaches or harms [ 51,56]. This
is partly also because older users are less frequent users of social
networking sites and hesitant users.
Leaked photos: One the most pressing concerns discussed by
participants was their personal information being leaked by some-
one. This was also the most frequently experienced privacy viola-
tion amongst the participants. For young girls, leaked photos or
communication was identified as a significant harm. They used
words such as ‘traumatised’, ‘depressed’, ‘devastated’ and ‘violated’
to illustrate their experiences of leaks, highlighting an element of
shame associated with having their pictures or messages leaked on
social media.
One female participant revealed that the sharing of some one’s
address online is one of the worst privacy violations followed by
the sharing of pictures: "If it’s about address then it’s very very bad
and it can be very harmful and if it’s about pictures that too is just
invading someone’s privacy. "-F12
In particular, the sanctity of the body and its violation was an
extreme harm experienced predominantly by female participants.
Young girls particular considered their body as absolutely private.
This was expressed by F10, who was asked what she would never
share in online spaces: "My body. My naked body, I’m not okay with
that. "
In contrast to other contexts, in Pakistan, the shame of leaked
content is not a burden carried solely by the individual but is shared
by the individual’s family and community. Honour and chastity are
integral to gender relations in Pakistan. Those who value honour
are not only concerned with attaining and maintaining it but also
199CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark Maryam Mustafa et al.
avoiding the shame associated with its loss [ 66]. F8 talked about the
societal and familial backlash that females would likely encounter
highlighting the gendered differences: "If a girl gets her photo leaked
and if a boy gets leaked, people will talk more about the girl, the girl
will get hurt more you know the society we live in is very mean to
women and obviously face more harassment so if you get a pic leaked
nobody’s gonna care if you’re a boy but if you’re a girl people are
gonna comment on that picture, make negative comments, harass you,
they’re gonna think bad things about you. "
In the context of a deeply sensitive and embedded notion of
purdah, if women are found to be engaging in activities beyond what
is socially and culturally acceptable, it can have severe consequences
for their reputation and their family’s social standing. It can also
lead to gender-based violence from within the family and beyond.
In contrast, male participants when experiencing privacy violations
and harms felt anger instead of the shame and trauma experienced
by the female participants. Young men are also less likely to be
held responsible for ’dis-honouring’ the whole family or to suffer
tangible harms in terms of loss of privileges (access to devices and
online spaces), loss of mobility or ostracization within their social
circles or families.
Leaked Chats and Screenshots: Another reported violation
was the leaking of chats, where participants private chats were
screenshot and shared with wider audiences. For male users, this
concern amongst participants was largely motivated by the desire
to contain adult content they were sharing or watching. We find
that while honour does not play a pivotal role in privacy behaviours
for young male users, shame is a salient feature as it concerns social
stigma around the consumption of content that is considered taboo
or obscene. This shame was reflected in the fears young people had
about potential leaks and was largely related to their parents find-
ing out about leaked content. A combination of social and cultural
norms dictated by religious teachings around piety and purity can
be seen as a driving force behind such shame. In situations where
a leak had occurred, participants mentioned feeling insecure, de-
pressed, and judged. One female participant shared that the leaking
of her personal chats had a direct consequence on her social life,
resulting in judgement from friends and a fear of sharing informa-
tion and conversing online. As a consequence F2 now refrains from
any controversial conversations online because the past experience
have made her cyber-paranoid and she fears that someone might
be reading her conversations.
Unsolicited Direct Messages: Participants narrated experi-
ences of strangers sending them inappropriate content in direct
messages on SNS (Social Networking Sites), while other participants
shared the fear of this happening to them. Female teens viewed
receiving unwanted messages as a form of privacy violation and a
direct harm, compared to relatively fewer male participants. Female
participants also recalled instances of harassment and receiving
unsolicited pornographic material. There was a clear sexual nature
to the unwanted attention, particularly the sharing of inappropriate
content with them as minors, their lack of understanding of the
potential harms and the consequences as a result of being exposed
to porn. For our female participants the most frequently experi-
enced harm was constant harassment by older men through DMs
and friend requests. Most female participants shared experiences of
being forced to see pictures sent by a stranger despite warning themto stop. Some revealed being exposed to traumatic, inappropriate
content as young as 12 years old: " The earliest I remember I was
like 12. Instagram bots that message users to promote products or
whatever, but this bot was promoting like a porn link and, I was just
12 right? So it was like ’hey let’s chat’ and then this cherry emoji and I
didn’t know that that meant and there was a link. And so, they didn’t
show any picture like um you know you have to accept, decline or
block. And before I couldn’t see any picture, I could just see a link so I
was like okay Accept. And as soon as I accepted, there was a really
inappropriate picture and I got really scared. so then, I immediately
blocked them and that was really traumatising."-F14 In contrast
to the harassment faced by female participants, male participants
often mentioned receiving messages from spam accounts and bots.
Those who received direct messages did not consider them harass-
ment or a harm and instead ignored the requests and moved on.
Similarly, when male participants were sent threatening messages
they did not perceive them as particularly harmful. M6 reveals that
he was blackmailed and threatened by a stranger who claimed to
possess information about his family but blocking the resolved the
problem.
This again, is deeply tied to the conservative patriarchal nature of
Pakistani society where women, as bearers of their families’ honour
and reputation, feel a greater fear of unwanted communication as it
can have unintended consequences including disrepute and shame.
Unauthorized Access to Personal Accounts: Participants
revealed that they had faced situations where strangers had gained
unauthorized access to their personal accounts. The hacking of an
account was not specified as an isolated harm, but was discussed
as particularly traumatising due to its effect on participants’ social
standing among peers. One participant revealed that he had learnt
of his social media accounts being used to upload content from
friends while another elaborated on the alarming nature of the
hacking and the consequent embarrassment he felt at having to
explain the breach to his friends. Participants had few avenues for
retrieving or reporting hacked accounts, leading to fear of their
private content being leaked as a result of the hack.
4.2 Key Constructs that Impact Privacy
Practices
4.2.1 Family Expectations and Privacy. Participants reported join-
ing social networking sites at an average of 11 years. Out of 30
participants (17F, 13M), 28 (15F, 13M) had a phone as a personal
device with internet connectivity. 2 female participants didn’t have
phones but had a laptop with internet access, 20 participants also
had a laptop, and 9 had either a tablet or iPad (shared access to some
devices). In order to understand the impacts of familial expectations
and boundaries on teen’s privacy behaviours, we asked participants
about their family structure and values (i.e whether they considered
themselves to be part of conservative, liberal or mixed households).
This is an important factor in the Pakistani context to help us un-
derstand the constraints teens might face in maintaining private
digital lives and to understand their perceptions of ’private’.
Most of the participants in the study lived in a nuclear family
which included their siblings, and parents. 2 female participants
shared that they live in a joint family with extended family members
including uncles, aunts and grandparents.
200Pakistani Teens and Privacy - How Gender Disparities, Religion and Family Values Impact the Privacy Design Space CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark
Participants shared that they had liberal leaning families but
also further revealed the expectation of gender segregation by their
families. They faced restrictions on interacting with the opposite
gender online but the participants found these restrictions normal
and still thought of their families as liberal. 8 participants (3F,5M)
belonged to conservative families and faced certain restrictions set
by their parents.
Conservatism often manifests through parental restrictions on
children, moral policing, and gender segregation. Our participants
had an over-riding concern and fear of the expectations of their fam-
ilies. They were less concerned about what they as individuals want
and more about what is expected of them from their families. For
example, many participants discussed fears of their parents finding
out about their online activities or their families misunderstanding
their actions online. Most of these fears are linked the performance
of ’piety’; of their actions being seen by family as ’immodest’. One
of the major themes is familial expectations of gender segregation
online. Both male and female respondents were not allowed to inter-
act with the opposite gender online. This is particularly salient for
female respondents who specifically mention their fears of being
caught interacting with male users online. Those participants who
did maintain online relationships kept them hidden from parents.
This suggests a performance of privacy that does not extend
beyond familial and social bounds to be performed as an individual
right. In our context we see privacy being enacted to uphold the
social order. Female participants express concerns about sharing
content that they feel might trigger male members of their families.
For example, a participant revealed strategically curating her on-
line experience to ensure gender segregation for her family’s sake:
"Sometimes I ask my male friends to not tag me on Facebook or not
comment on my pictures like posting emojis or something like that
because I know they’re my friends but my parents or my relatives
won’t understand so I stop them and sometimes, for LinkedIn you
see everything the other person does, so sometimes I also feel - what
will my father think that I’m liking more of guys posts so that scares
me too. "-F4 In contrast, our male participants shared that teenagers
watch adult web series and porn content online and also use abusive
language in their direct messages (dm’s) without the knowledge of
their parents.
Young people in our sample are seen to constantly be negoti-
ating the boundary between individuality and group privacy in
an attempt to make online spaces their own without being seen to
violate social norms or familial expectations of digital behaviours.
4.2.2 Religion and Privacy. Along with familial expectations, an
important consideration when enacting and performing privacy
in digital spaces for our participants were religious beliefs. Young
female users, in particular, alluded to fears of moral policing in
offline and online spaces [ 49]. Young girls are well aware of the
unintended and real-world consequences of online social transgres-
sions and the costs a breach in those religious norms carry for them.
This hyper awareness is reflected in the way young girls strate-
gically filtered content to fit what was expected of them by their
families, informed by religious Pakistani society. One participant
stated that she limits her content to ensure not offending her male
members of her family: "There are posts like the Aurat march posts
and I feel like the males of my family will get triggered and theywill start an argument sort of a thing so I just avoid sharing that
sort of stuff on Facebook. "-F4 Aurat (Women’s) March is an annual
women’s rights demonstration by activists across major cities in
Pakistan which has been subjected to heavy criticism in Pakistan
for going against the dominant cultural values of Pakistani soci-
ety [31]. Openly supporting Aurat March is therefore considered a
controversial and potentially risky activity because of its assumed
association with vulgarity, Western influences and ultimately, it’s
“un-Islamic” nature.
Religion is a deeply sensitive issue in Pakistan; one that is empha-
sized legally, institutionally and socially through strict rules around
the virtue and chastity of women. Young girls fear judgement and
consequently struggle to maintain a balance between an enjoyable
yet religiously and morally policed online existence. This struggle
is exemplified through the strategic filtering of judgemental family
members or ensuring that content that could offend religious senti-
ments remains hidden constantly navigating ’privacy’ through a
religious and moral lens. Content and activities that do not fit with
their or their families beliefs is often how ’privacy’ is defined and
understood. In contrast male participants were less concerned about
offending family members and less fearful of offline repercussions.
Instead their concerns were more focused on familial expectations
of online behaviors and personas.
Digital Purdah: Our findings reveal that gender segregated
spaces are frequently used to share content online and to enact a
digital form of Purdah as it exists offline. In particular, almost all
male participants said they were part of some closed gender-specific
group, while 9 women elaborated on using gender segregated spaces
such as private group chats or closed groups. Another 9 female
participants emphasized specific boundaries of information disclo-
sure online, where they believed that posts or pictures they share
should only be available to a female-only audience. Female partic-
ipants’ reasons for using gender segregated groups ranged from
fear of misuse by a wider audience to feeling a sense of safety with
other females. Most of our female participants relied on gender
segregated digital spaces to share their content, including ensur-
ing the absence of male friends from their digital profiles. Female
participants shared that they are part of such groups to share their
pictures or videos with female friends only because this preserves
their privacy. They believed that their information is safe with other
women: "I make a lot of crazy videos too that are like very personal
to me so I would not like my male friends to ever see that.. " F1
Female users actively work to ensure there is segregation be-
tween genders as part of their privacy strategy. In particular, they
hide their stories as well as discourage their male friends from
commenting or tagging them in photos. The rigidity of this struc-
ture was exemplified by a male participant who explained how
transgressing a gender boundary he was unaware of led to serious
consequences for him when he ’liked’ three pictures on a female
coach’s Instagram. The first transgression was the ’liking’ of the
female coach’s photo and secondly, repeating this act another two
times. Gender segregation is a central component of Pakistani so-
ciety, where the seclusion of women from public spaces is pivotal
to the maintenance of family honour. As such, most events such
as weddings, funerals and religious gatherings in Pakistan remain
gender segregated in order to maintain this social norm. Though
201CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark Maryam Mustafa et al.
Western scholarship has often depicted the purdah as a patriar-
chal instrument to impose gender inequality [ 3], scholarship from
Muslim Feminist scholars suggests that the Purdah also provides
women with a level of privacy which promotes their social par-
ticipation and mobility [ 3,14,51]. Placed into online spaces, this
‘digital purdah’ is also deeply embedded in young teenagers’ fears
regarding privacy and their privacy practices.
4.2.3 Gendered Privacy Behaviours. Female participants experi-
enced gendered violence in online spaces and were more cautious
online users, acutely aware of their own vulnerability with regards
to privacy and operating online with discretion and a heightened
awareness of risks involved. Female participants adopted strategies
beyond platform affordances to vet any potential friends or follow-
ers online. They only allowed online connections with users who
they had met physically or had mutual friends with. Female users
leverage offline networks and connections to verify “safe” virtual
connections: "I do have a criteria for who I accept. I accept requests
from people I know, its best if I’ve met them but its okay if I know
them through other people. "-F8
Additionally, female users rely on each other to ensure safety
online. In contrast to perceiving themselves as exercising individ-
ual privacy, young female teens, given their added vulnerability,
carve out collective vetting procedures for themselves. In partic-
ular, participants use mutual friends and female siblings to verify
whether other users are safe to add to their networks. This finding
aligns with with Marwick and boyd’s notion of "networked pri-
vacy", where a collection of social norms, audience perception and
factors affecting concealment and disclosure force individuals into
new networks to maintain privacy" [ 41]. For young female users, it
is vital to establish a safe network to screen others before allowing
them into their private spaces. Our findings suggest that female
users create an additional boundary one step prior to information
disclosure by engaging with other female users to create boundaries
around their usage to ensure information does not flow out or is
exposed to the wrong audience.
4.2.4 Privacy Practices to Navigate Norms. Here we list some of the
most commonly used privacy features amongst our populations to
ensure privacy of their data but also to ensure online safety.
Limited Lists. Most of our participants maintained different
lists to separate out friends, family and acquaintances for tiered
access to content. They used ’close friends’ lists and posted stories
and content only to those lists to separate out other audiences. The
most popular platform in use is Instagram with it’s close friends
story feature. Participants also use WhatsApp status where they
can tailor settings and select a specific list of people who can see
their stories.
Participants also use custom lists across Instagram and Snapchat
and tailor different types of content across different types of audi-
ences. For example, M11 has set up complex mechanisms across
two platforms (Instagram and Snapchat) where on one platform
(Snapchat) he has a permanent list of friends but Instagram allows
him the flexibility to hide his stories from specific audiences. The
hide stories feature was frequently used by participants who lived
in combined family setup’s and needed to ensure digital privacy of
their physical activities.Multiple Accounts. Participants also relied on using multiple
accounts which they referred to as ’spam accounts’ or ’finstas’
where they had limited connections. These accounts were used as
free, open spaces where they could post whatever they wanted as
they considered those accounts as ’un-watched’ spaces with only
trustworthy friends. F5 said she maintains two accounts and has
only very close friends in her spam account whereas her main
account can be accessed by a larger audience.
Only one participant discussed using an applock for additional
privacy on their phone to secure their social media apps. This was
not a common privacy preserving practice amongst our partici-
pants.
4.3 Personas
We generate personas (Table 2) from axial coding our interview
data. These personas have been designed to highlight situations,
contexts, expectations and behaviors that arise in young people’s
lives in Pakistan and by doing so, help designers to validate their
privacy concepts towards this specific population. Our personas
were made to capture the diversity of personality traits of partic-
ipants from our interviews. We made our personas based on the
lived experiences, challenges and needs of users within our study.
We found of particular importance in developing our personas was
the degree with which each persona feels free to express themselves
online. Our interview data reveals how self-expression online is in-
formed by (male) privilege, family honor, and religious and familial
norms. This was further corroborated by posting behaviour during
the focus group activities. Although the personas in themselves
are helpful to communicate and empathize when designing prod-
ucts [ 43], we also use our personas in our focus group co-design
sessions to systematize posting behaviour on a spectrum of different
privacy preference.
Our personas were made to capture the diversity of personality
traits of participants from our interviews. We found of particular
importance in developing our personas was the degree with which
each persona feels free to express themselves online. Our interview
data reveals how self-expression online is informed by (male) priv-
ilege, family honor, and religious and familial norms. In order of
freedom, our personas are: Nauman (most free), Sara, Farhan and
Khadija (most restricted).
4.4 Focus Group Discussion and Activities
The Focus group discussions were based on personas created through
the semi-structured interviews and were designed to explore actual
behaviours while the interviews focused on experienced harms, pri-
vacy perceptions and beliefs. The focus groups were action oriented
with participants performing specific tasks. The interview data was
further corroborated by posting behaviour during the focus group
activities.
In the analysis of our sessions, we use the frequency of an issue
across sessions to understand its priority. Additionally, since our dis-
cussions were gender separated we report insights dis-aggregated
by gender.
In the first activity participants were asked to brainstorm and
sort the reasons to first use social media (task 1), and then their
privacy concerns (task 1). In activity two, participants were asked
to construct and label an image board for an assigned persona. All
202Pakistani Teens and Privacy - How Gender Disparities, Religion and Family Values Impact the Privacy Design Space CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark
Persona Description
Nauman (M), 17
Lahore,
PakistanNauman wants to be a popular person at his school and enjoys the attention he gets from social media. He often
participates in internet challenges and makes funny content with his friends that he posts on his public Instagram
account. He has many friends from his school and is seen hanging out with ‘his boys’ and occasionally some girls
though he goes to an all-boys school. He posts about his hangouts on Instagram, which has a sizable following.
He sometimes posts things because he feels like he has to post every month or people may stop following him.
Nauman has had mental health challenges since he was 10, around the age he joined social media. He sometimes
feels a bit hopeless when it comes to his studies but is currently feeling okay. He often does things that his friends
ask him to, which causes him to reduce his studying time. He is under pressure to do well in his studies because
his sister is studying abroad in a prestigious university.
Sara (F), 16
Islamabad,
PakistanSara lives in a nuclear household with her mother, father and one older sister. Their house is located in Bahria Town,
Islamabad [expensive, gated community]. Her father is a businessman, and her mother runs an non-government
organization. Sara has a personal phone (an iPhone 11) and MacBook to use for school and other activities. She
has accounts on Instagram, Snapchat, Twitter and uses Facebook rarely. She has a public account on Instagram
and a private “finsta” account for her close friends.
Though she goes to an all-girls private school, Sara’s best friends’ group includes two girls and two boys who
she met online through a group chat. She is popular in school and frequently takes part in the Drama Club and
Musical nights. She feels that Instagram helps her meet new people with interests similar to hers. However, Sara
became a little scared of social media a page called “Lahore Confessions” on Instagram started posting false gossip
about her and her friends. She reported the account but has felt a little unsafe since then.
Farhan (M), 14
Hyderabad,
PakistanFarhan comes from a religious family and has been on social media for 3 years now with parental supervision. He
joined Instagram because many of the popular kids were on it and he did not want to miss out. He is allowed to
have a phone, unlike his 2 sisters, even though one of his sisters is 2 years older than him (his other sister is 3
years younger).
Farhan is a studious member at his school, and tries to participate at school assemblies and other important
academic events such as science competitions. He’s not always invited to parties and seeing photos of his
schoolmates doing things without him affects his confidence. He feels a lot of stress because he is picked on by
some of his classmates. He cares a lot about feeling safe online and wants to be in control of who can see his
content. He is so vigilant of his privacy and does not post a lot of identifying information e.g. he keeps his location
services turned off.
However, he wants to fit in with his class members so he is following a few of his friends and has a few of them
following him on Instagram. However, his family is also on his social media accounts.
Khadija (F), 15
Lahore,
PakistanKhadija lives in the upper portion of a house in Dharampura [lower-middle class neighborhood]. She is a middle
child, with one younger brother and an older brother. The bottom portion of the house is occupied by her
grandparents and uncle. Khadija’s father is a police officer, and her mother is a housewife. She shares a bedroom
with her younger brother. She also shares her laptop with him but has a personal phone on which she uses social
media. She is not allowed to have Facebook or Snapchat but has one private account on Instagram.
Khadija is a high achiever in her school. She regularly takes part in competitions and is well liked by her teachers.
However, in school she struggles to make friends and is often bullied by the popular girls in school. She has a few
friends but only talks to them in school and does not visit them outside school. On Instagram, Khadija does not
accept any follower requests from boys and follows her mother and older brother on the app. She often feels like
if she had more freedom, she would want to post pictures of herself but is scared of being judged and bullied by
others.
Table 2: Personas of young people after our interviews.
category names were made by participants, though some category
names have been edited for clarity. The summary of frequencies
can be seen in tables 3, 4, and 5.
4.4.1 Task 1 - Reasons for Using Social Networking Sites. It was
important to understand the incentive participants had to use social
media in order to address the conditions which lead to the creationof the privacy paradox [ 8]. The privacy paradox is the phenomenon
associated with discrepancies observed between participants’ pri-
vacy attitudes and their actual behaviour. In a recent paper Westin
and Chiasson [ 69], explain the paradox as a systematic way of
manipulating users into making privacy compromising decisions
based on dark design patterns [ 10]. They propose FoMO-Centric
203CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark Maryam Mustafa et al.
Table 3: Top Privacy Concerns on Social Media by number of
cards in category (Total 148 notes)
Overall Female Male
Platform security
and safety (33%)Creepy behaviour
(53%)Platform security
and safety (38%)
Creepy behaviour
(29%)Platform security
and safety (30%)Personal secrets
(16%)
Personal secrets
(12%)Personal secrets
(9%)Data collection
(13%)
Data collection
(7%)Data collection
(3%)Reputation (%10)
Overall Female Male
Communication or
networking (25%)Entertainment
(22%)Communication or
networking (37%)
Entertainment
(23%)Communication or
networking (20%)Entertainment
(25%)
News or informa-
tion (16%)Personal develop-
ment or learning
(18%)News or informa-
tion (25%)
Personal develop-
ment or learning
(13%)News or informa-
tion (17%)Business/Marketing
(%14)
Activism or social
work (6%)Activism or social
work (7%)Personal develop-
ment or learning
(6%)
Academic or career
(4%)Academic or career
(6%)Activism or social
work (6%)
Table 4: Top reasons to use social media by number of cards
in category (Total notes 186)
Design, a framework to understand such behaviour. FoMO is the
Fear of Missing Out or a pervasive feeling of missing out on reward-
ing experiences that others are having [ 19,69]. Younger people
are the most likely demographic to relate to feelings of FoMO [ 1],
and FoMO has been linked to as a predictor of problematic social
media use [ 19]. Across our sessions we saw students participat-
ing in social media because they wanted to stay informed of what
was happening in the lives of their friends and “to keep updated
regarding trends” (Session 2).
We found that the most mentioned use of social media was to
communicate or network with individuals and groups. Reasons to
communicate ranged from all encompassing statements such as
"Being bored in the summer and wanting to keep up with whats
going on" (session 1) to discussing products or the news with friends.
The prevalent theme of this category was the need to keep up with
what their friends were up to. The second most popular reason
to use social media was for entertainment. This category included
consumption of various types of media such as ’swiping through
memes’(session 4), ’watching (their) favourite youtubers’ (session 2),
and ’to read true crime cases’(session 2). The category also included
Figure 2: As part of activity 1, every participant (each had a
different color) from our second girls session had concerns
about location tracking, titling the subcategory ’life in dan-
ger’.
platform specific features such as using ’snapchat for selfies and
filters’ (session 3) and ’to word vomit on twitter’ (session 3).
Thenews category had mostly to do with keeping up with music,
celebrities, world events and political commentary. In our second
session female participants emphasized ’for social change’ as a
sub category of news. They saw the role of social media as an
advocacy tool for women and minority groups; one card read ’(I use
social media) to talk about issues that are ruining society like rape
cases in Pakistan and the terrible situation in Palestine’ (session
3). Our qualitative interviews also revealed the importance female
participants placed on creating digital safe spaces, using novel
strategies for protection and prevention and being hyper aware of
privacy and safety issues concerning women.
The popularity of the top three categories - which account for
more than 60% of all cards - can be explained by FoMO i.e. the
participants desire to ’stay in the loop’ or else feel left out of current
trends and life updates of their friends. All three categories are
time bound. Delays in responding to someones birthday, a news
event, or a trend can seem like missing out which is in line with
FoMO-Centric Design [ 69]. Beyond the top three categories teens
also mentioned using social media for personal development. In
this category, participants wrote about using social media to get
inspiration for their talents (e.g. cooking, arts and crafts), to find
motivation (by ’reading testimonials ... on reddit’ (session 3)) and
for their religious study (’listen naats (Islamic religious hymns)’).
Other categories that participants made included academic or career
oriented use, activism, shopping, business, and content creation in
that order.
4.4.2 Task 1 - Privacy concerns on social media. The privacy con-
cerns that we identify in this task extend our findings beyond our
thematic analysis in section 4.2.3. A theme that was noticeably ab-
sent for male users but was the overwhelming concern for female
users was creepy behaviours. In fact, about half of all cards pro-
duced during the activities in the female session dealt with creepy
behaviours. Our findings are in-line with the literature on South
Asian gendered digital violence particularly as identified by Sam-
basivan et al who in a study with South Asian women identified
cyberstalking, impersonation, and personal content leakages [ 56]
as key harms experienced online for women in the region. The
category of creepy behaviours as identified by our participants
was dominated with leakages of personal content, with many girls
afraid of someone getting access to contacts, personal chats, and
social media accounts as a whole. Our female participants also fre-
quently mentioned fears of cyberstalking in the form of “lewd and
highly inappropriate messages on numerous platforms” (session 2),
204Pakistani Teens and Privacy - How Gender Disparities, Religion and Family Values Impact the Privacy Design Space CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark
which escalated to issues of life and death as one teen mentioned
“someone can easily locate where you’re at by your snapchat ac-
count especially and break into (their) house thru (sic) that info”
(session 3) (also see fig 2). Instances of impersonation were linked
with loss of reputation “someone can make a fake account by my
name, acting as me but doing things i wouldn’t do.” (session 2). Ad-
ditionally, in this category our female participants feared accounts
of men impersonating as women trying to catfish them. While most
of of Sambasivan et al’s work focuses on harms for women, our
findings extent the work and points at gendered violence that starts
for women at a younger age, when they are minors on SNSs.
In task 1 we saw platform security and safety to be the large
concern for both boys and girls. The category included perceived
vulnerability of platforms that might allow others to ’hack’ or ’peep’
into their account. This vulnerability was perceived as allowing
bad actors to get a hold of a teens location or other sensitive data
via a data breach of the platforms. One prevalent concern was the
outing of personal chats. Other concerns included hacks that could
enable access to device sensors such as a phone’s microphone.
The overall top third category was that of personal secrets, where
teens described a need to keep aspects of their life private. Personal
secrets include instances when a person would like to appear offline,
a person’s personal information such as username and passwords,
and instances of time spent with friends or family. A related cate-
gory is that of deviant behaviour where mostly male participants
talked about keeping activities that might be looked down as aber-
rant in society such as smoking hookahs, romantic relationships,
and content of ’saved’3posts private.
Teens were also somewhat concerned by app data collection,
though most concerns were uninformed about how data is actually
collected. Beyond the sentiments of "data usage by advertising
companies" (session 1), and "wouldn’t like having his data sold to a
third party company" (session 4), design artefacts spoke to pervasive
myths or unproven statements about data collection techniques
such as eavesdropping on offline conversations, and the ’stealing’
of personal information by third-party entities from SNSs.
4.4.3 Task 2 - Persona image board. In task two, participants first
constructed image boards that represented a persona’s social media
account, and later labeled the board with reasons for why the per-
sonas might post what they would and what they might not post
(see fig. 3). To construct their image boards most participants copied
pictures from an image bank we provided and dragged them under
the persona card. However, they were free to search for images
outside of the bank if they felt the need to. The participants were
then instructed to categorize the generated cards similar to how
they had categorized them in activity 1 by placing similar ideas
together.
The most popular type of reasoning when choosing a picture was
that of religion. Religious posting included words of comfort and
those of religious holiday celebrations such as Eid. A popular image
posted in every session after the first (after we included the image)
was one that read "Sabr (patience), your time will come". Religion
was also used to understand what being conservative or liberal
meant. Khadija, our persona with her parents and older brother
3Saving a picture is a feature on Instagram that collates pictures that users might want
to bookmark for later
Figure 3: Teens in activity 2 labeled what a persona would or
would not post. The figure shows a sampling from across ses-
sions. Source: Top-left from session 3, top-right from session
3, bottom-left from session 4, and bottom-right from session
2.
on her social media account was perceived to make religious posts
and was seen as engaging in significant self-censoring. In contrast,
Nauman and Sara, described as popular teens with public accounts
who expressed themselves relatively freely and had both male and
female friends, were perceived to be less religious. In either case
(Khadija or Nauman and Sara) their personas made no reference to
religion. This freedom or lack thereof for self-expression corrobo-
rates our findings where conservative users of social media were
seen to be more likely to limit their expression. This also supports
our insights from our interviews of the deep impact religious beliefs
have on participant posting and privacy behaviours. These limita-
tions to self-expression may be explained by our findings from our
interviews in section 4.2.2, where we discuss how young people in
Pakistan face active religion based moral policing online.
The second and third most significant types of posting was con-
tent that was specifically catered to meet the expectations of family
and friends, respectively. Khadija’s persona revealed attitudes to-
wards a family orientation which were associated with self-censor
and consisted of notions of ’respect’ towards elders. Nauman at
the other end was seen as someone that would tailoring his con-
tent towards for friends by posting pictures of his hangouts with
them. Posting pictures of friends may be a strategy to reaffirm
relationships by validating them online [ 60] and as our partici-
pants explained to gain social capital or in their words to ’look cool’
(session 1).
Of note in our findings from task 2 is how they corroborate and
explain our findings about familial and societal pressures from our
interviews. Participants identified the top three regulating forces on
social media as informed by expectations from religion, family, and
friends. Another factor affecting posting behaviours was personal-
ity. Farhan and Khadija, our less popular young people personas,
would not post as much because they were seen as ’reserved’ or
’hardworking’. Young people were also aware of self-presentation
performances online, particularly some of the girls were suspicious
of Nauman’s public facing persona (see top-left image in fig 3). He
was seen as being facetious when posting about feminism, only
205CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark Maryam Mustafa et al.
Table 5: Overall persona image board labels by number of
cards in category (Total 61 notes categorized)4
Overall Female Male
Religion (25%) Personality-based
posting (20%)Religion (42%)
Family orientation
(13%)(to get) popular
(14%)Friends orientation
(19%)
Friends orientation
(11%)Religion (11%) Family orientation
(15%)
Personality-based
posting (11%)Family orientation
(11%)Funny content (%8)
Funny content (8%) Gender equality or
activist (5%)Education (5%)
doing it to get popular. Interestingly, this was backed by how boys
did not see Nauman posting feminist content, one participant ex-
plained this in terms of Nauman’s limited exposure to women as
friends. If Sara was to post the same content however, she was seen
as a proponent of gender equality.
Other content that our personas posted was funny content and
content related to their hobbies. No card was labeled with data
collection concerns.
5 DISCUSSION
Figure 4: Stakeholders in a Pakistani adolescent’s life that
set norms that must be upheld. The most significant relation-
ships are indicated with complete arrows while relationships
that exert less influence on online behaviours are indicated
with dashed arrows.
Our findings show that privacy experiences of young participants
in Pakistan are severely affected by contextual factors. We revealed
that our participants navigate multiple conflicting pressures, expec-
tations and control from different stakeholders including parents,
peers, religious beliefs and gendered expectations (Figure. 4). These
demands influence how participants use privacy-preserving strate-
gies including but not limited to private accounts, using real-world
physical networks to ’reputation-check’ individuals, limited lists,
asking male friends to not tag them in pictures and using different
applications and multiple accounts targeted to different audiences.Some of these practices are ubiquitous amongst young people and
have been reported in earlier studies in WEIRD countries [ 40,41].
However, the hyper-awareness of potential privacy violations, pri-
vacy risks, and the forms that privacy harms take, particularly
amongst our female participants is unique to the context of teens
in Pakistan. Additionally, the significant impact religious beliefs
and values have, and the expectations of being seen to uphold these
beliefs visibly in online spaces add complexity and nuance to un-
derstanding privacy design. In contrast to prior work suggesting
risk taking practices among teens in the U.S. [ 26], we find teens
in our sample to be very risk-aware and risk-averse, setting up
protective practices in anticipation of a risk or expected harm. Un-
like prior work exploring privacy practices amongst women in the
Global South, young people in our sample are tech savvy, literate,
more aware of the potential harms in online spaces and actively
working to set up protective measures to navigate these harms.
This contrasts starkly with the strategies of avoidance reported in
earlier work focusing on women in Bangladesh, India, Pakistan
and the Arab Gulf [ 2,51,57], where much of the emphasis is on
privacy-literacy or when exploring religious intersections focuses
specifically on religious scholars and teachings. In contrast our
findings highlight the ways in which teens who are influenced by
multiple factors (Figure.4 in Appendix) enact privacy through a
religious lens. To make these findings more accessible to privacy
designers and other researchers, we developed four personas that
reflect the spectrum of preferences and behavior we found in the
interview data.
5.1 Non-normative Privacy
While we focus on the norms that determine information flow
and privacy behaviours [ 48] we find that focusing on the norms
alone ignores the power dynamics embedded in whosets the norms,
andwho is then upholding the norms. This finding from our semi-
structured interviews is also supported by the subsequently con-
ducted focus groups, where specific scenarios were considered.
As highlighted by Marwick et al. fundamentally privacy is a
social norm [ 9], and consequently given the significant difference
in the social context and values of Pakistan compared to say the
USA [ 41] or the EU [ 46], the ways in which privacy is enacted
and how the harms manifest and for whom also differs. So we find
young gender plays a significant role in determining experienced
harms and the offline impact of online harms.
In our case the norms are determined by parents, the dominant
religion and culture, which are then being upheld by adolescents
who have little control or choice in determining the norms but
are forced to carry the burden of behaving in specific ways to
uphold them. Additionally, the dominant norms do not impact both
genders equally. So, norms around family honour, modesty, piety,
and reputation dictate whether particular behaviours are considered
violations and disproportionately impact female teenagers.
Gender. The vulnerabilities of non-dominant groups are often
invisible and the normative design of applications and technologies
means young people in our context are unable to break away from
these pre-determined ’appropriate’ ways of being and doing. One
strategy employed by both male and female participants to carve out
non-normative, freer, safe spaces with additional privacy and a lack
206Pakistani Teens and Privacy - How Gender Disparities, Religion and Family Values Impact the Privacy Design Space CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark
of surveillance from family members is creating or joining restricted
online spaces. This however means exclusion and marginalization
from the broader digital space.
This interaction of norms and power structures is particularly
salient for gendered norms around adolescent girls role, the various
religious and social sentiments attached to their existence, and
the resulting surveillance it causes in their lives. This surveillance
is sometimes passive, enabled by platform features that let other
users know who has interacted with what on social feeds, or active
because SNSs catalog user activity for others to observe for later
(e.g. your history of likes on Twitter is available for anyone that is
following you).
We find young female users negotiate online spaces from a place
of fear; afraid of revealing information or images that might bring
shame on the family, afraid of being tagged in pictures with boys
which might then get back to their parents, afraid to open their
DM’s for fear of unsolicited messages from older men. In contrast,
prior work reveals college women in the U.S. disclose personal
information on Facebook at a greater level than do men across
different categories, like the “About Me” section, photo albums
and images of the self in a central photograph [ 32]. Similar to our
sample population several studies in the Global North also highlight
women perceive more risk online and report more privacy concerns
than men [18, 25].
Similarly, our male participants enact complex privacy strategies
to hide relationships and interactions with the opposite gender from
parents and also carry the weight of bringing shame on the family.
This fear stems from an overwhelming focus on societal ’norms ’
of piety, purdah and family honor which while disproportionately
borne by female participants also impact young men and are de-
termined by parents, religious beliefs and deep rooted patriarchal
structures.
Religion. Islamic beliefs are the central value system used to de-
fine privacy boundaries and behaviours. In particular, gender norms
rooted in the Islamic belief in Purdah and modesty play a strong
role in determining what is and is not considered a privacy breach.
DM’s from strange men as a transgression for young girls (but not
young men) is rooted in the Islamic belief of ’Mahram ’; a segre-
gation of the opposite gender based on familial relationships or
gender. A Mahram is a member of the family with whom marriage
would be considered illegal under Islamic law and from whom pur-
dah, is not obligatory. Purdah is also not mandatory with people of
the same gender. And so for our female participants other women
are Mahram, but only a subset of male relatives are. For our male
participants only a subset of their female relatives are considered
Mahram. Our participants enact gender segregated spaces, using
either private groups or limited lists, restricting access to their pro-
file pictures, as a way to enact digital purdah by limiting audiences
based on these Islamic principles. We can imagine then that for a
male adolescent it is perhaps important to present a pious, digital
identity embedded in his family’s Islamic beliefs, but also impor-
tant as a young person to be able to explore his own identity in
surveillance-free spaces and without the expectation to uphold his
family’s religious values. We find that given the secular framework
in which privacy has been conceived and enacted our participantsface a great deal of friction in enacting boundaries based on their
Islamic faith.
In contrast, studies exploring young people privacy concerns and
the norms that determine those concerns in the U.S users’ informa-
tion privacy behaviors are affected users’ perceived importance of
information privacy, information privacy self-efficacy and parental
influence instead of religious values [ 11,71]. Similar studies ex-
ploring older teens attitudes towards online privacy and safety in
the U.S. reveal teens are less concerned about their physical safety,
tending to feel safe online but do however, feel concerned about
their privacy are are careful about what to share publicly vs within
a group [ 4]. Factors contributing to teens privacy practices in the
U.S. are friends’ privacy settings, type of contacts, specific privacy
concerns, past experiences and the presence of parental restric-
tions or surveillance [ 39–41,62,73,74], in contrast to what we find
where in addition to friends religion and religious values along with
gender and patriarchal norms play a significant role in determining
privacy behaviours or concerns.
5.2 Directions for Future Research and Design
In this section, we discuss potential ways forward towards re-
imagining a privacy design that can help moderate privacy in the
given cultural context and beyond. The following recommendations
are based on 1. designing for an evolving independent identity (out-
side of cultural or parental influence), 2. designing to allow young
people more control over the boundaries and beliefs they choose
to enact online and 3. ensuring young people feel safeonline. The
presented personas reflect the spectrum of privacy preferences and
reflects the needs and values of our interview participants. Our
data suggests that cultural-specific measures, such as digital Purdah
to allow people to enact boundaries based on the Purdah and the
concept of Mahram in digital spaces is importance to consider. As
such, norms that are present in the offline world could be trans-
ferred to online spaces. While such an approach can help replicate
cultural and religious norms in the online world, it also restricts
online interactions in a certain way. We argue that such approaches
should be explored in future work to understand if the benefits
outweigh the limitations of such an approach.
Besides measures that are determined by the cultural context,
our work elicits user needs that are also present in other cultural
contexts. Our work however goes beyond replicating these impli-
cations for future research and design, as our data highlights the
severity of offline real-world consequences of privacy problems
in restrictive and patriarchal countries such as Pakistan for vul-
nerable populations like teenagers who are minors and have little
agency and decision-making control. Our work thus strengthens a
long-existing call for improving privacy mediation in digital spaces.
In particular, our data suggests that platforms should better
inform users about who is using or misusing their data and restrict
functions such as making screenshots and screen recording. This
feature is informed by our participants who pointed to Snapchat’s
notification feature that lets them know if their pictures meant for
private consumption have had a screenshot taken 4.2.4.
Our findings further support the suggestion of contextualized
prompts from Masaki et al. [ 42] highlighting that adolescents might
benefit from nudges at various points of their experience to make
207CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark Maryam Mustafa et al.
informed decisions especially in reference to potential offline con-
sequences of said decisions.
Many participants feared harms associated with unsolicited di-
rect messages, which is a problem that is also transferable to other
cultural contexts and age groups, especially for minors. Filtering
potentially traumatic content (contextualized) would ensure young
people have an additional layer of safety online. In particular, a
oft repeated concern by our participants was the absence of any
boundary that prevents older men messaging minors - this is partic-
ularly problematic given the nature of these messages, as presented
in Section 4.1.1.
6 CONCLUSION
Our work highlights the importance of gendered and religious val-
ues in driving privacy expectations amongst young people and
their subsequent online behaviours suggesting the importance of
understanding localized, contextual belief systems which have a
significant impact on online experiences of safety and privacy. Fur-
thermore, we contribute personas to make privacy behavior and
preferences of Pakistani teenagers more accessible to designers,
who want to consider this particularly vulnerable group of users.
Design decisions that are made accordingly will also be beneficial
for other users in different cultural contexts.
Our qualitative findings, along with the developed personas
and design recommendations can thus help designers to better
understand the design space and to validate use cases and scenarios
in which privacy controls are particularly needed by vulnerable
adolescents who are not aware of the implications of their behavior.
REFERENCES
[1]Jessica P. Abel, Cheryl L. Buff, and Sarah A. Burr. [n. d.]. Social Media and the
Fear of Missing Out: Scale Development and Assessment. 14, 1 ([n. d.]), 33–44.
https://doi.org/10.19030/jber.v14i1.9554
[2]Norah Abokhodair and Sarah Vieweg. 2016. Privacy & social media in the context
of the Arab Gulf. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM conference on designing interactive
systems. 672–683.
[3]Lila Abu-Lughod. 2002. Do Muslim women really need saving? Anthropological
reflections on cultural relativism and its others. American anthropologist 104, 3
(2002), 783–790.
[4]Denise E Agosto and June Abbas. 2017. “Don’t be dumb—that’s the rule I try to
live by”: A closer look at older teens’ online privacy and safety attitudes. New
Media & Society 19, 3 (2017), 347–365.
[5]Shakeel Ahmad. 2018. Unleashing the potential of a young Pakistan. Retrieved
from Human Development Reports: http://hdr. undp. org/en/content/unleashing-
potential-young-pakistan (2018).
[6]Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Md Romael Haque, Jay Chen, and Nicola Dell. 2017. Digital
privacy challenges with shared mobile phone use in Bangladesh. Proceedings of
the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 1, CSCW (2017), 1–20.
[7]Mahdi Nasrullah Al-Ameen, Tanjina Tamanna, Swapnil Nandy, MA Manazir Ah-
san, Priyank Chandra, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. We Don’t Give a Second
Thought Before Providing Our Information: Understanding Users’ Perceptions
of Information Collection by Apps in Urban Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the
3rd ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies. 32–43.
[8]Susanne Barth and Menno D.T. de Jong. 2017. The Privacy Paradox Investigating
Discrepancies between Expressed Privacy Concerns and Actual Online Behavior
A Systematic Literature Review. Telemat. Inf. 34, 7 (Nov. 2017), 1038–1058. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2017.04.013
[9]Danah Boyd and Alice E Marwick. 2011. Social privacy in networked publics:
Teens’ attitudes, practices, and strategies. In A decade in internet time: Symposium
on the dynamics of the internet and society.
[10] Christoph Bösch, Benjamin Erb, Frank Kargl, Henning Kopp, and Stefan Pfatthe-
icher. 2016. Tales from the Dark Side: Privacy Dark Strategies and Privacy Dark
Patterns. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2016, 4 (2016), 237–254.
https://doi.org/doi:10.1515/popets-2016-0038
[11] Sangmi Chai, Sharmistha Bagchi-Sen, Claudia Morrell, H Raghav Rao, and
Shambhu J Upadhyaya. 2009. Internet and online information privacy: An ex-
ploratory study of preteens and early teens. IEEE Transactions on ProfessionalCommunication 52, 2 (2009), 167–182.
[12] Jay Chen, Michael Paik, and Kelly McCabe. 2014. Exploring internet security
perceptions and practices in urban ghana. In 10th Symposium On Usable Privacy
and Security ( {SOUPS}2014). 129–142.
[13] Lorrie Faith Cranor, Adam L Durity, Abigail Marsh, and Blase Ur. 2014. Par-
ents’ and teens’ perspectives on privacy in a technology-filled world. In 10th
Symposium On Usable Privacy and Security ( {SOUPS}2014). 19–35.
[14] Hester Eisenstein. 2015. Feminism seduced: How global elites use women’s labor
and ideas to exploit the world. Routledge.
[15] Maha Faisal and Asmaa Alsumait. 2011. Social network privacy and trust concerns.
InProceedings of the 13th International Conference on Information Integration and
Web-based Applications and Services. 416–419.
[16] Matthias Fassl, Lea Theresa Gröber, and Katharina Krombholz. 2021. Exploring
user-centered security design for usable authentication ceremonies. In Proceedings
of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–15.
[17] Yang Feng and Wenjing Xie. 2014. Teens’ concern for privacy when using social
networking sites: An analysis of socialization agents and relationships with
privacy-protecting behaviors. Computers in Human Behavior 33 (2014), 153–162.
[18] Joshua Fogel and Elham Nehmad. 2009. Internet social network communities:
Risk taking, trust, and privacy concerns. Computers in human behavior 25, 1
(2009), 153–160.
[19] Vittoria Franchina, Mariek Vanden Abeele, Antonius J van Rooij, Gianluca
Lo Coco, and Lieven De Marez. [n. d.]. Fear of Missing Out as a Predictor of Prob-
lematic Social Media Use and Phubbing Behavior among Flemish Adolescents.
15, 10 ([n. d.]), 2319. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15102319 pubmed:30360407
Publisher: MDPI.
[20] Abdul Hadi et al .2017. Patriarchy and gender-based violence in Pakistan. Euro-
pean Journal of Social Sciences Education and Research 10, 2 (2017), 297–304.
[21] SM Taiabul Haque, MD Romael Haque, Swapnil Nandy, Priyank Chandra,
Mahdi Nasrullah Al-Ameen, Shion Guha, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. Pri-
vacy Vulnerabilities in Public Digital Service Centers in Dhaka, Bangladesh. In
Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Information and Communica-
tion Technologies and Development. 1–12.
[22] Justin Helper and Stacy Blasiola. [n. d.]. TTC Labs - Users’ top-of-mind privacy
concerns. https://www.ttclabs.net/research/users-top-of-mind-privacy-concerns
[23] Sara Hertog, Patrick Gerland, John Wilmoth, et al .2023. India overtakes China
as the world’s most populous country. (2023).
[24] Donell Holloway, Lelia Green, and Sonia Livingstone. 2013. Zero to eight: Young
children and their internet use. (2013).
[25] Mariea Grubbs Hoy and George Milne. 2010. Gender differences in privacy-related
measures for young adult Facebook users. Journal of interactive advertising 10, 2
(2010), 28–45.
[26] Haiyan Jia, Pamela J Wisniewski, Heng Xu, Mary Beth Rosson, and John M
Carroll. 2015. Risk-taking as a learning process for shaping teen’s online informa-
tion privacy behaviors. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing. 583–599.
[27] Haiyan Jia, Pamela J. Wisniewski, Heng Xu, Mary Beth Rosson, and John M.
Carroll. 2015. Risk-Taking as a Learning Process for Shaping Teen’s Online
Information Privacy Behaviors. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (Vancouver, BC,
Canada) (CSCW ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
583–599. https://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675287
[28] Lisa M Jones, Kimberly J Mitchell, and David Finkelhor. 2012. Trends in youth
internet victimization: Findings from three youth internet safety surveys 2000–
2010. Journal of adolescent Health 50, 2 (2012), 179–186.
[29] Naveena Karusala, Apoorva Bhalla, and Neha Kumar. 2019. Privacy, patriarchy,
and participation on social media. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interac-
tive Systems Conference. 511–526.
[30] Simon Kemp. 2021. Digital 2021 October global statshot report. DataReportal–
Global Digital Insights. Available online at: https://datareportal. com/reports/digital-
2021-october-global-statshot (accessed December 1, 2021) (2021).
[31] Syeda Mehmoona Khushbakht and Munazza Sultana. 2020. The Women Activism
in Pakistan: An Analysis of ‘Aurat March. Al-Milal: Journal of Religion and
Thought 2, 2 (2020), 50–69.
[32] Ethan A Kolek and Daniel Saunders. 2008. Online disclosure: An empirical
examination of undergraduate Facebook profiles. NASPA journal 45, 1 (2008),
1–25.
[33] Anja Kovacs, Richa Kaul Padte, and Shobha SV. 2013. Don’t let it stand!’An
exploratory study of women and verbal online abuse in India.
[34] Ponnurangam Kumaraguru and Lorrie Cranor. 2006. Privacy in India: Attitudes
and Awareness. In Privacy Enhancing Technologies, George Danezis and David
Martin (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 243–258.
[35] Amanda Lenhart, Mary Madden, Aaron Smith, Kristen Purcell, Kathryn Zickuhr,
and Lee Rainie. 2011. Teens, Kindness and Cruelty on Social Network Sites: How
American Teens Navigate the New World of" Digital Citizenship". Pew Internet &
American Life Project (2011).
[36] Sonia Livingstone, Leslie Haddon, Anke Görzig, and Kjartan Ólafsson. 2011. Risks
and safety on the internet: the perspective of European children: full findings
208Pakistani Teens and Privacy - How Gender Disparities, Religion and Family Values Impact the Privacy Design Space CCS ’23, November 26–30, 2023, Copenhagen, Denmark
and policy implications from the EU Kids Online survey of 9-16 year olds and
their parents in 25 countries. (2011).
[37] Sonia Livingstone, Kjartan Ólafsson, Brian O’Neill, and Veronica Donoso. 2012.
Towards a better internet for children: findings and recommendations from EU
Kids Online to inform the CEO coalition. (2012).
[38] Stephen M Lyon. 2019. Political Kinship in Pakistan: Descent, Marriage, and
Government Stability. Lexington Books.
[39] Mary Madden, Amanda Lenhart, Sandra Cortesi, Urs Gasser, Maeve Duggan,
Aaron Smith, and Meredith Beaton. 2013. Teens, social media, and privacy. Pew
Research Center 21, 1055 (2013), 2–86.
[40] Alice Marwick, Claire Fontaine, and Danah Boyd. 2017. “Nobody sees it, nobody
gets mad”: Social media, privacy, and personal responsibility among low-SES
youth. Social Media+ Society 3, 2 (2017), 2056305117710455.
[41] Alice E Marwick and Danah Boyd. 2014. Networked privacy: How teenagers
negotiate context in social media. New media & society 16, 7 (2014), 1051–1067.
[42] Hiroaki Masaki, Kengo Shibata, Shui Hoshino, Takahiro Ishihama, Nagayuki
Saito, and Koji Yatani. 2020. Exploring Nudge Designs to Help Adolescent SNS Users
Avoid Privacy and Safety Threats. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1–11.
[43] Tara Matthews, Tejinder Judge, and Steve Whittaker. 2012. How Do Designers
and User Experience Professionals Actually Perceive and Use Personas? Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1219–1228.
[44] Nora McDonald and Andrea Forte. 2020. The politics of privacy theories: Moving
from norms to vulnerabilities. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. 1–14.
[45] Veena Meetoo and Heidi Safia Mirza. 2007. “There is nothing ‘honourable’about
honour killings”: Gender, violence and the limits of multiculturalism. In Women’s
Studies International Forum, Vol. 30. Elsevier, 187–200.
[46] Caroline Lancelot Miltgen and Dominique Peyrat-Guillard. 2014. Cultural and
generational influences on privacy concerns: a qualitative study in seven Euro-
pean countries. European journal of information systems 23, 2 (2014), 103–125.
[47] Deborah M Moscardelli and Richard Divine. 2007. Adolescents’ concern for
privacy when using the Internet: An empirical analysis of predictors and relation-
ships with privacy-protecting behaviors. Family and Consumer Sciences Research
Journal 35, 3 (2007), 232–252.
[48] Helen Nissenbaum. 2004. Privacy as contextual integrity. Wash. L. Rev. 79 (2004),
119.
[49] Sonia Omer and Sadia Jabeen. 2015. The role of family in teaching religious and
moral values to their children in urban areas: A case study of Lahore (Pakistan).
Pakistan Vision 16, 1 (2015), 258.
[50] Luci Pangrazio and Neil Selwyn. 2017. ’My Data, My Bad ...’: Young People’s
Personal Data Understandings and (Counter)Practices. In Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Social Media Society (Toronto, ON, Canada). As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 52, 5 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3097286.3097338
[51] Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat, Mahiratul Jannat, Mahdi Nasrullah Al-Ameen,
SM Taiabul Haque, Ashad Kabir, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2021. Purdah,
Amanah, and Gheebat: Understanding Privacy in Bangladeshi" pious”Muslim
Communities. In ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies
(ACM COMPASS 2021). Association for Computing Machinery, Inc (ACM).
[52] Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat, Firaz Ahmed Peer, Hawra Rabaan, Nusrat Jahan
Mim, Maryam Mustafa, Kentaro Toyama, Robert B Markum, Elizabeth Buie,
Jessica Hammer, Sharifa Sultana, et al .2022. Integrating Religion, Faith, and
Spirituality in HCI. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
Extended Abstracts. 1–6.
[53] Larry D Rosen, Nancy A Cheever, and L Mark Carrier. 2008. The association of
parenting style and child age with parental limit setting and adolescent MySpace
behavior. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 29, 6 (2008), 459–471.
[54] Johnny Saldaña. 2021. The coding manual for qualitative researchers. sage.
[55] Nithya Sambasivan, Nova Ahmed, Amna Batool, Elie Bursztein, Elizabeth
Churchill, Laura Sanely Gaytan-Lugo, Tara Matthews, David Nemar, Kurt
Thomas, and Sunny Consolvo. 2019. Toward gender-equitable privacy and
security in south asia. IEEE Security & Privacy 17, 4 (2019), 71–77.
[56] Nithya Sambasivan, Amna Batool, Nova Ahmed, Tara Matthews, Kurt Thomas,
Laura Sanely Gaytán-Lugo, David Nemer, Elie Bursztein, Elizabeth Churchill, and
Sunny Consolvo. 2019. " They Don’t Leave Us Alone Anywhere We Go" Genderand Digital Abuse in South Asia. In proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–14.
[57] Nithya Sambasivan, Garen Checkley, Amna Batool, Nova Ahmed, David Nemer,
Laura Sanely Gaytán-Lugo, Tara Matthews, Sunny Consolvo, and Elizabeth
Churchill. 2018. " Privacy is not for me, it’s for those rich women": Performative
Privacy Practices on Mobile Phones by Women in South Asia. In Fourteenth
Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security ( {SOUPS}2018). 127–142.
[58] Nithya Sambasivan, Ed Cutrell, Kentaro Toyama, and Bonnie Nardi. 2010. In-
termediated technology use in developing communities. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2583–2592.
[59] Tehmina Sattar, Ghulam Yasin, I Fani, and Saima Afzal. 2010. Determinants of
Generation Gap among Parents and Children in Multan City, Pakistan. Interna-
tional Resource Journal of Finance and Economics 60 (2010).
[60] Angeline Close Scheinbaum. 2012. Snapshots of the Self: Exploring the Role of
Online Mobile Photo Sharing in Identity Development Among Adolescent Girls
Jenna Drenten. In Online Consumer Behavior. Routledge, 37–68.
[61] Klaus Schwab, Richard Samans, Saadia Zahidi, Till Alexander Leopold, Vesselina
Ratcheva, Ricardo Hausmann, and Laura D Tyson. 2017. The global gender gap
report 2017. World Economic Forum.
[62] Christina Shane-Simpson, Adriana Manago, Naomi Gaggi, and Kristen Gillespie-
Lynch. 2018. Why do college students prefer Facebook, Twitter, or Instagram?
Site affordances, tensions between privacy and self-expression, and implications
for social capital. Computers in human behavior 86 (2018), 276–288.
[63] Anselm L. Strauss and Juliet M. Corbin. 1997. Grounded theory in practice. Sage.
288 pages.
[64] Kaiwen Sun, Carlo Sugatan, Tanisha Afnan, Hayley Simon, Susan A Gelman,
Jenny Radesky, and Florian Schaub. 2021. “They See You’re a Girl if You Pick a Pink
Robot with a Skirt”: A Qualitative Study of How Children Conceptualize Data
Processing and Digital Privacy Risks. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–34.
[65] Zeynep Tufekci. 2008. Can you see me now? Audience and disclosure regulation
in online social network sites. Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society 28, 1
(2008), 20–36.
[66] Wikan Unni. 2008. In honour of Fadime: Murder and shame.
[67] Aditya Vashistha, Richard Anderson, and Shrirang Mare. 2018. Examining Secu-
rity and Privacy Research in Developing Regions (COMPASS ’18). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 25, 14 pages.
[68] Maike Vollstedt and Sebastian Rezat. 2019. An introduction to grounded theory
with a special focus on axial coding and the coding paradigm. Compendium for
early career researchers in mathematics education 13, 1 (2019), 81–100.
[69] Fiona Westin and Sonia Chiasson. 2021. “It’s So Difficult to Sever That Connec-
tion”: The Role of FoMO in Users’ Reluctant Privacy Behaviours. In Proceedings
of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Yokohama,
Japan) (CHI ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
Article 550, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445104
[70] Mark Willoughby. 2019. A review of the risks associated with children and young
people’s social media use and the implications for social work practice. Journal
of Social Work Practice 33, 2 (2019), 127–140.
[71] Pamela Wisniewski, Haiyan Jia, Heng Xu, Mary Beth Rosson, and John M Carroll.
2015. " Preventative" vs." Reactive" How Parental Mediation Influences Teens’
Social Media Privacy Behaviors. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on
computer supported cooperative work & social computing. 302–316.
[72] Pamela Wisniewski, Heng Xu, Mary Beth Rosson, Daniel F Perkins, and John M
Carroll. 2016. Dear diary: Teens reflect on their weekly online risk experiences.
InProceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
3919–3930.
[73] Pamela J Wisniewski, Heng Xu, Mary Beth Rosson, and John M Carroll. 2014.
Adolescent online safety: the" moral" of the story. In Proceedings of the 17th
ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing.
1258–1271.
[74] Seounmi Youn. 2008. Parental influence and teens’ attitude toward online privacy
protection. Journal of Consumer Affairs 42, 3 (2008), 362–388.
[75] Jun Zhao, Ge Wang, Carys Dally, Petr Slovak, Julian Edbrooke-Childs, Max
Van Kleek, and Nigel Shadbolt. 2019. I make up a silly name’ Understanding
Children’s Perception of Privacy Risks Online. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13.
209