homes from Covid-19. She 
explained that Covid-19 patients 
were possessed by a bad spirit, full 
of curse. The method of stopping 
the curse included a set of activities 
called tantra . The example of tantra 
she showed us used some jantra  
(scripts for recital, usually placed 
within geometric shapes) on a mud 
pot, scripts from witch books, 
and certain spices (Figure 1, left). 
The pot with the jantra should be 
placed in front of the main door 
of the house, and the spices were 
to hang from somewhere close 
to the pot. Thus, the pot would 
radiate a positive energy that made 
cursed people feel uncomfortable 
upon approaching the house and 
encourage them to turn away. The 
villagers were producing such 
jantra on a mass scale, putting 
them into amulets called tabiz , and 
selling them in their local markets 
(Figure 1, right).
‘IMMORALITY IS  
THE MAIN VULNERABILITY’
The villagers mentioned a wide 
range of people who could be the 
victims of Covid-19, including those 
whose lifestyles deviate from village 
norms—for example, someone 
engaged in illegal business activity 
or who consumed food that is 
haram , or forbidden by Islam. Our 
discussion with the rural women 
led us to dissect the story of a man 
in their village who had recently 
returned from Kuwait. The women 
said he was no longer a “local 
person” to them since he had broken 
many moral codes. One of the 
women said,
He went there [Kuwait] by bribing 
for a duplicate [fake] passport and 
visa. He was living in Kuwait for many Many communities 
in Asia, Africa, and 
Latin America—
often left out of 
human-computer 
interaction (HCI) 
discussions—
defy the boundary of scientific 
rationality and seek healthcare 
and well-being from various 
traditional faith-based practices. 
For example, South African 
indigenous traditional healers serve 
60 percent of their population. 
And thousands of Peruvians use 
the ancient tradition of mystical 
healing and shamanism for their 
well-being, as do many people in 
South Asia [1,2]. Here we broadly 
term such faith-based practices 
witchcraft . During crises like 
pandemics, witches often use local 
beliefs and alternative rationales to 
explain diseases, their spread, and 
their impacts, as well as to innovate 
protective measures. Recently, 
modern scientific innovations 
and computing technologies have 
started encroaching on these 
faith-based practices. Covid-19 has 
demonstrated how modern scientific 
rationality and local alternative 
rationality interact—something  
that has remained understudied in 
our mainstream HCI literature for a 
long time.
Today’s HCI is increasingly 
interested in alternative assumptions 
and decision making around well-
being in the Global South. Our 
own work in this vein, involving 
ethnographic field studies in rural 
Bangladesh, reveals that rural 
healers, witches, and their followers 
explain Covid-19 using religious, 
parareligious, and supernatural 
metaphors and narratives. In this ongoing fieldwork, so far we have 
engaged with more than 30 male and 
female participants. This post presents 
part of our findings and focuses on 
the rural conceptualization of the 
coronavirus, its relation to morality, 
and a few possible ways of stopping 
the virus from rural perspectives. We 
explain these through the three lenses 
presented below.
‘MICROBE IS A CURSE  
THAT SPREADS  
THROUGH UNHAPPINESS’
The healers and witches (known as 
Kabiraz ) told us that Covid-19 was a 
strange and new situation for them. 
However, they also told us that they 
had experienced similar challenging 
situations in the past, and that 
they could use that knowledge to 
handle Covid-19. These witches 
defined the coronavirus as an “evil 
spirit and a curse.” Over the course 
of our conversations, a witch also 
mentioned that people with weak 
physical and mental health tend to 
be more vulnerable to such curses. 
For this reason, she criticized strict 
policies like quarantines, which 
would impact negatively on the 
minds of weak people (i.e., further 
weaken their states of mind).
Another witch shared their 
methods of protecting clients’ Fighting Coronavirus with Faith 
Religious and Parareligious Responses to Covid-19 in Bangladesh
Covid-19 has 
demonstrated how 
modern scientific 
rationality and  
local alternative 
rationality interact.
@INTERACTIONSMAG
6   INTERACTIONS   JANUARY–FEBRUARY 2021
BLOG@IXThe Interactions  website (interactions.acm.org) hosts a stable of bloggers who share insights and observations on HCI, often 
challenging current practices. Each issue we’ll publish selected posts from some of the leading and emerging voices in the field.
Sharifa Sultana,  Cornell University, A.K.M. Najmul Islam, University of Turku, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, University of Torontoand HCI: Morality, modernity, and 
postcolonial computing in rural 
Bangladesh. Proc. of the 2019 SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems.  ACM, New York, 2019.
2. Sultana, S., Ahmed, S.I., and Fussell S.R. 
Parar-daktar understands my problems 
better: Disentangling the challenges to 
designing better access to healthcare in 
rural Bangladesh. Proc. of the ACM on 
Human-Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW 
(2019), 168.
3. https:/ /www.facebook.com/
groups/538670766844801/
permalink/561537171224827/
 Sharifa Sultana  is a Ph.D. student in 
information science at Cornell University. 
She is interested in ICTD, critical computing, 
well-being, and feminist HCI. She studies 
marginalized rural populations in Bangladesh 
and aims to design computational tools and 
systems to address the challenges for the rural 
low-education population while accessing 
information.
 →ss3634@cornell.edu
 A.K.M. Najmul Islam  is an adjunct 
professor in the Department of Future 
Technologies, University of Turku, Finland, and 
in the LUT School of Engineering Science, LUT 
University, Finland.
 →najmul.islam@utu.fi
 Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed is an assistant 
professor of computer science at the University 
of Toronto. For the past 12 years, he has been 
conducting ethnography and design research 
with marginalized groups in the Global South.
 →ishtiaque@cs.toronto.eduyears. Most likely, he was engaged in 
an illegal business there, as he did not 
have the real papers. So, he must be 
more vulnerable to this curse.
The women also told us that 
the elders and leaders of the 
neighborhood urgently discussed 
this issue and found him to be 
dangerous for the other residents—
especially if he socialized and 
went to the tea stalls, mosques, 
and marketplaces. This was less 
an issue of transmitting the virus, 
and more because that person 
could influence others to indulge 
in immorality, which would 
eventually cause Covid-19. They 
decided to not be friendly with that 
person, as he was already cursed, 
and to restrict his freedom of 
movement around the village.
DESIGN, RULES, AND FAITH
The villagers adapted to the 
quarantine in their own way. We 
found religious faith and local beliefs 
playing a major role in how villagers 
in rural Bangladesh interpreted 
and implemented the hygiene 
measures. For example, a woman 
who had rented out part of her house 
updated the house hygiene rules 
for her household and the renters 
by adapting to the Islamic way of 
washing body parts ( Wudu ):
We have a new rule in our house 
that now no one is allowed to enter the 
house without having Wudu and using 
soap for it.
She also referred to Islamic 
literature to support some of her 
rules:
Once Mohammad (PBUH) was 
cured by reciting Surah Al-Nas and 
Surah Al-Falaq when someone spelled 
him with black magic. We ask the 
residents to recite these two Surah 
loudly during that cleaning time.
This and many such examples 
show how responses to Covid-19 in 
rural Bangladesh are rooted in and 
shaped by the villagers’ spiritual 
beliefs and traditional practices. 
The modern scientific advice is 
neither rejected nor accepted by 
the villagers: They have acted 
according to their own narrative 
and developed a communal effort to combat Covid-19 in their own way.
Our ongoing and long-term 
engagement with these rural 
communities in Bangladesh 
demonstrates how millions of people 
in the Global South live outside 
the realm of modern scientific 
knowledge, and how they interact 
with modernity, science, and 
technology using their own faith-
based narratives. Taking these local 
narratives and traditional faiths 
seriously essentially dismantles 
HCI’s current orientation toward 
science and the perception of 
computing as a vehicle for it. 
Through our work, we join the 
growing movement within HCI 
to ask: Whose health? Whose 
harm? And whose knowledge? 
And we challenge the hegemony 
of the secular Western science in 
computing practices that attempts 
to colonize millions of lives in the 
Global South. We believe that 
we need to decenter Western 
scientific knowledge as the main 
source of HCI design to address 
the contextual needs of millions, 
especially in the time of public 
health emergencies like Covid-19.
Endnotes
1. Sultana, S. and Ahmed, S.I. Witchcraft 
DOI: 10.1145/3440926  COPYRIGHT HELD BY AUTHORSFigure 1. (Left) A set of tantra that includes a jantra on a mud pot and green and red chilies. 
This has to be put beside the main door of the house to keep the curse away. (Right) A seller 
claims that tabiz will prevent infection from Covid-19 (an image that recently went viral among 
Bangladeshi Facebook users [3]).
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
JANUARY–FEBRUARY 2021   INTERACTIONS   7