Triangulating Race, Capital, and Technology 
Rachel Kuo 
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, USA 
rskuo@email.unc.edu 
Cindy Kaiying Lin 
Cornell University, USA 
ckl58@cornell.edu 
ABSTRACT 
This workshop transnationally triangulates race, capital, and tech-
nology to understand how colonialism and imperialism linger and 
mutate across various sites and scales. Furthermore, it brings to-
gether transnational HCI work that engages with critical ethnic 
studies as well as postcolonial and decolonial studies to intervene 
on the feld’s long-standing epistemology and site focus on the 
West and fxation on the nation-state at large. Attention to colonial 
residual, geopolitical tensions, and historical specifcities brings 
HCI in conversation with geopolitical shifts and their very real 
impacts on the practice and theory of technology design, while 
troubling the presumptions of who “gets to be human” in HCI. We 
invite papers and presentations that seek to: 1) triangulate sites of 
study; 2) draw from diferent disciplines, theoretical approaches, 
and methodologies; and 3) engage themes of transnational capital, 
race, and technology. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → HCI theory, concepts and 
models. 
KEYWORDS 
Transnational HCI; Capital; Race; Geopolitics 
ACM Reference Format: 
Rachel Kuo, Yuchen Chen, Cindy Kaiying Lin, and Seyram Avle. 2022. Trian-
gulating Race, Capital, and Technology. In CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts (CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts), April 
29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5 pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3503737 
1 BACKGROUND 
This workshop aims to transnationally triangulate race, capital, 
and technology to understand how colonialism and imperialism 
linger and mutate across various sites and scales. Specifcally, the 
workshop focuses on research that opens up relations between tech-
nocapitalism and racialization in the contemporary global economy. 
Two key observations undergird this focus: 1) the demonstrably 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. 
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 
CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9156-6/22/04. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3503737 Yuchen Chen 
University of Michigan, USA 
cycyc@umich.edu 
Seyram Avle 
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, USA 
savle@umass.edu 
racial and geopolitical tones of contemporary technological dis-
courses and practices, including commentary on "the new cold 
war," "the rise of China and India," etc.; and 2) the entrenchment of 
technocapitalism, seen through the growing power of "big tech." 
By technocapitalism or technoscientifc capitalism, we mean the 
embedding of capitalism with technology and the increasing inter-
dependence between science and innovation with fnancial capital 
and markets through the commodifcation of knowledge and the 
assetization of data [4, 5, 24, 25]. Racialization here refers to systems 
of signifcation made legitimate by mutually constitutive processes 
of unequal social organization and diferentiation [21], including 
transnational and “colonial divisions” of labor, technology, and 
capital [18]. 
This framing of geopolitical struggles over technology as eco-
nomic and ideological competition across empires and between 
superpowers is not new; we see it, say, in the appropriation of Cold 
War rhetoric in contemporary media discourses about China and 
the United States [11, 19]. What they reveal instead, are the long-
standing and unresolved tensions (and arguably anxieties) about 
who can take on global leadership. The rise of big tech within this 
context, as much as they rely on colonial legacies of resource and 
knowledge extraction, create new forms of power relations across 
multiple capitalisms and imperialisms and across technological, 
economic, and state infrastructures [1, 12]. These new power rela-
tions also take on new forms of racialization across scales. Several 
examples demonstrate this: the racialized criminalization of trade 
espionage, “national security” concerns over platforms including 
Huawei and Tiktok; xenophobic sentiment during the COVID-19 
pandemic against Asians and Africans; narratives of “tech authori-
tarianism’ versus “unbridled libertarianism,” etc. 
Tracing the transnational circuits and triangulations between 
race, capital, and technology are (or should be) central to how 
HCI conceptualizes technology development and use [20]. The 
colonial and racial histories of technology development co-exist 
with various violences against Black, Indigenous, Asian and other 
‘marginalized others’ that play out in local, regional, and global con-
texts. This modern world system of racial capitalism is dependent 
on legacies of slavery, violence, imperialism, and genocide [21]. 
Racial capitalism, the process of social and economic accumulation 
and extraction predicated on racial diference, in part continues to 
manifest through the development, innovation, and governance 
of computing technologies. The geopolitics of digital technologies 
therefore increasingly shape how states and regions relate with 
one another [15] and we perceive an urgent need to bring HCI 
in conversation with these geopolitical shifts and their very real 
impacts on the practice and theory of technology design and use.CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Rachel Kuo et al. 
Thus, this workshop brings together transnational HCI work 
that engages with critical ethnic studies as well as postcolonial and 
decolonial studies to intervene on the feld’s long-standing episte-
mology and site focus on the West and fxation on the nation-state 
at large. We emphasize genealogies of critical ethnic studies that 
emerge from Third World liberation and decolonial movements 
that see race as constituted internationally within and against con-
ditions of empire and mechanisms of power.1 We see the need for 
transnational analysis in studies of race and technology that en-
gage new and shifting formations of global racial capitalism and 
neocolonialism in both theoretical frameworks and empirical con-
texts to challenge U.S., Western, and English-centered dominance. 
Beyond locating the "West" as a sole site of opposition, a transna-
tional framework also emphasizes “inter-referencing” across vari-
ous sites, such as engaging supply chain organizing between India 
and China or technology development between South America and 
the Caribbean, or formations of city states between Hong Kong and 
Singapore [8]. 
Forms of racial "othering" manifest in both the discourse and 
practices of the "technology arms race" and STEM research ex-
changes and collaborations – cementing what Sylvia Wynter de-
scribes as racialized codes of "overdevelopment" and "underdevel-
opment" that undergird historical and contemporary social orders 
[26]. For example, while western media outlets continue to insist 
on the newness of China’s control, exploitation, and power over 
other countries, seemingly unencumbered by domestic interests 
and agency, debates in computing and design have returned to 
nationalistic, bloc-like frameworks for characterizing technological 
dominance instead of attending to the complex, heterogenous, and 
multi varied ways transnational logistics, investments, partnerships 
have enabled the development of tech economies and products. 
We emphasize both attention to transnational movements of peo-
ple, capital, labor, and resources as well as “placed-based politics”, 
grounding transnationalism in the welfare of local communities 
[9]. 
This workshop therefore invites critical perspectives interrogat-
ing diferent scales of racial violence and actors, including military, 
research institutions, investors/industry, governments, and inter-
governmental organizations, to understand and reframe the residual 
efects and emerging mutations of colonial power and imperialism 
and its unevenly distributed impacts in a transnational context. 
Specifcally, our goals are to: 
• Provide space to collectively interrogate and refect on theo-
ries of racialization, capitalism, and geopolitics in transna-
tional contexts through studies of computing and technol-
ogy; 
• De-center particular kinds of theorization about technology 
and power that has largely been built on evidence and sites 
in the West, including decolonial interventions to dominant 
perceptions of HCI as “borderless” (see [7]); 
• Facilitate interdisciplinary and transnational conversations 
on race and technology in HCI through bridging across felds 
like critical ethnic studies (e.g. Black studies, Asian American 
1Consider this in contrast to current discussions of critical race theory that is rooted in 
a very particular US history of racial relations and domestic policy (see, [22] and [20]). studies, and Native and Indigenous studies), global commu-
nication and area studies; refugee, migration, and border 
studies; history and historiography; postcolonial and decolo-
nial theory; feminist technoscience; gender, sexuality, and 
queer studies; political geography; and more; 
• Ofer methodological interventions to presentist debates in 
HCI by looking to archival, genealogical, ethnographic, and 
other qualitative and historical methods [23]; 
• Convene a frst set of ideas and papers aimed at a special issue 
in TOCHI on racial capitalism, geopolitics, and technology 
and contributions to Interactions. 
By triangulating race, capital, and technology, we approach the 
multiplicities and the continuities of colonial and imperialist power 
in various sites and scales, with attentiveness to historical specifci-
ties. In an attempt to complicate the well worn paradigms such as 
the “West and the rest” [8] our workshop troubles the presumptions 
of who gets to be human in HCI by calling for critical engagements 
of race, capitalism, politics, technology, power, (settler)colonialism, 
and imperialism in HCI through transnational contexts. We in-
vite papers and presentations that seek to: 1) triangulate sites of 
study; 2) draw from diferent disciplines, theoretical approaches, 
and methodologies; and 3) engage themes of transnational capital, 
race, and technology. 
We emphasize theorizations of geopolitical processes and tri-
angulations of racialization in relation to technology and capital 
through studies grounded in diferent empirical contexts [6, 16, 18]. 
The workshop centers the following questions: 
• How might the HCI community respond to the simplif-
cations and reductive portrayals of geopolitical tensions, 
especially in the realm of data science, AI, and computing, 
without succumbing to racial tropes and narratives and with-
out losing sight of new forms of power circulating across 
diferent scales and actors? 
• To wit, what are diferent theorizations, imaginaries, and 
vocabularies surrounding technology, geopolitics, and power 
that enable us to critically engage transnational formations 
of race in HCI? 
• And, how does technology interface with imperialism, na-
tionalism, and empire today, including multinational corpo-
rations and governments, and how do they operationalize 
practices and ideologies of control through technology de-
velopment and capital expansion? 
We emphasize the transnational to trace the geographic and 
political dimensions of technocapitalism while attending to the 
histories of colonization and logics of empire [10, 13]. We wel-
come various theoretical and empirical interpretations, scales, and 
groundings, to invite more empirical understandings of domination, 
white supremacy, and imperialism in diferent sites and locations. 
Already, CHI scholars have been contending with critical ques-
tions of race, politics, technology, and capital, especially in cri-
tiquing reductive portrayals of where technological expertise and 
economies originate from as well as attending to the multiple his-
tories and politics of race and ethnicity outside of settler colo-
nial regimes [2, 3, 13, 14, 17, 20]. This workshop builds on such 
work to investigate and contextualize specifc forms, practices, and 
histories of racialization, and the lived experiences of those whoTriangulating Race, Capital, and Technology CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
are racialized, displaced, and dispossessed in the context of global 
techno-capitalism. We therefore invite contributions that further 
explore, and solidify conceptual and empirical elaborations of how 
race, capital, and digital technology operate in various scales and 
geographies. Topics of interest include: 
• Geopolitical, economic, and technological entanglements 
between multiple regions. For example, technopolitics be-
tween the U.S., China, and Africa; Belt and Road Initiative 
(BRI) investments across regions such as Southeast Asia and 
MENA (Middle East and North Africa) and the putative re-
sponse of BBW (Build Better World) by the G7 (Group of 
Seven nations); 
• Racial and technological imaginaries around transnational 
migration: eg. the "migrant crisis" between Europe and the 
MENA regions or between South America and the United 
States; 
• Discussions of how capitalism profts from the ongoing pro-
duction of racialized diference, such as through the extrac-
tion, control, and dispossession of data, land, environment, 
and natural resources and exploitative labor and material 
conditions; 
• Diferent modes of imperialism facilitated by technologi-
cal development and capitalist expansion. For example, the 
embedding of legacies of slavery and settler colonialism in 
digital technology systems such as AI and facial recognition 
across the US, China, Africa, South America, etc.; 
• Military histories of computing and their relation to US hege-
mony embedded in transnational tech companies such as 
Facebook, etc; and in turn, discussions of how globalization 
further fuels militarism and war; 
• Triangulation of academic discourses around labor and tech-
nology, for instance shifts in discourses around China and 
India from "human factories" to "cheap labor," etc. ; 
• Explorations of contemporary and new formations of con-
cepts such as Techno-Orientalism [25] to anchor how racial, 
technological, and geopolitical imaginaries of Asia intersect 
with Western hegemony; 
• Transnational studies of technology labor, particularly those 
that trouble the centrality of the nation state. E.g work on 
software developers in big tech and multinational corpora-
tions; 
2 ORGANIZERS 
Each of the organizers has a long history of conducting qualitative 
and ethnographic work on race, politics, and technology through-
out East Asia, East and West Africa, Southeast Asia, and North 
America. This workshop was initiated after multiple discussions 
between the organizers after more than six years of diferent forms 
of collaboration between them. 
Dr. Rachel Kuo is a postdoctoral fellow at the Center for Infor-
mation, Technology, and Public Life and the School of Library and 
Information Science at the University of North Carolina-Chapel 
Hill. She is also a Visiting Scholar at Duke University’s program 
in Asian American and Diasporic Studies. She is interested in race, 
technology, and social movements. Yuchen Chen is a PhD candidate at Communication and Media 
at the University of Michigan. Her research looks at the transna-
tional fow of technology, knowledge, labor, and capital and how 
it relates to social experiments in China. Chen will be the main 
contact person for this workshop. 
Dr. Cindy Lin is a postdoctoral fellow at the Atkinson Center 
for Sustainability and Department of Information Science at Cor-
nell University. In Fall 2022, she will be an Assistant Professor at 
Pennsylvania State University’s College of Information Sciences 
and Technology. Her current research and book project focuses 
on the genealogies of ground truth in artifcial intelligence (AI) 
systems deployed within the environmental sciences. 
Dr. Seyram Avle is Assistant Professor of Global Digital Media 
in the Department of Communication at the University of Mas-
sachusetts, Amherst where she studies digital technology cultures 
and innovation across parts of Africa, China, and the United States. 
This work primarily takes a critical approach towards understand-
ing how digital technologies are made and used, as well as their 
implications for issues of labor, identity, and futures. 
3 WEBSITE AND SOCIAL MEDIA 
Details about the workshop call, details of the event, and participant 
bios will be made available on our website, http://racecapital.tech/. 
Accepted position papers from participants and future outputs of 
the workshop will be published on this website, which functions 
also as a repository for participants to develop workshop materi-
als before and after CHI’2022. We will ensure that our website is 
fully keyboard navigable, screen reader accessible, colour-contrast 
compliant to accommodate a variety of needs and abilities. 
4 PRE-WORKSHOP PLANS 
4.1 Workshop Recruitment and Application 
Information on the workshop and participation requirements will 
be posted on the website http://racecapital.tech/ and on e-fyers for 
distribution on various mailing lists and platforms of scholarly com-
munities, including the CHI and CSCW communities, science and 
technology studies (eg. STSGRAD), internet studies (eg.AoIR), eth-
nic and race studies (American Studies Association; African Studies 
Association, etc), and industry networks both within and outside of 
North America to attract participants with interdisciplinary train-
ing and regional representation. Additionally we will announce 
the call on social media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter. 
We will keep the workshop at a minimum of ten participants and 
maximum, twenty, including the organizers of this workshop. Par-
ticipants will be asked to provide 2-4 page position papers (1,500 
words maximum) responding to the following set of questions: 
• How do you locate your work within HCI and critical stud-
ies? Which community do you serve in your scholarship? 
What do you hope to gain from this workshop? 
• What theories, imaginaries, histories, methodologies, and 
vocabularies do you draw upon to think about the relation-
ship between technology, geopolitics, capital, and power that 
enable critical engagements with transnational formations 
of race in HCI?CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Rachel Kuo et al. 
• What are your research sites and/or practices that demon-
strate how technology interfaces with, operationalizes, and 
practices imperialism, nationalism, and empire? 
These questions solicit examples of potential participants’ re-
search related to the workshop themes of race, capital, and tech-
nology and crucially, how that pertains to the CHI community’s 
growing interest in social critique and anti-racist approaches to 
technology design and computing [20]. They ask authors to elab-
orate on how their own research has been informed by methods 
and techniques that draw from other disciplines, in an efort to 
elaborate on how treatments of race and capitalism have long been 
established in other disciplines and can further strengthen HCI 
approaches to critical computing and technology. Before the work-
shop, papers will be shared among participants so as to provide 
an adequate basis for discussion and interaction during the actual 
workshop. 
5 WORKSHOP STRUCTURE AND ACTIVITIES 
5.1 Workshop Setup 
Our workshop will be a 1-day hybrid event broken into two three-
hour working blocks to accommodate multiple time zones. We 
adopt this hybrid format to accommodate participants who may face 
travel limitations due to the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, as well 
as individuals who share health and accessibility-related concerns 
and needs. Participants unable to attend in-person will participate 
via the Zoom meeting platform. To ensure audibility, we will have a 
dedicated laptop, monitor, and speakers to interact with our virtual 
participants. We will also ensure that Zoom live caption function is 
turned on throughout the workshop and if possible, for participants 
to share any updated copies of their presentation or case studies 
materials so that both synchronous and asynchronous participants 
can follow along. Additionally, we will have a wi-f extender and 
mobile hotspot to ensure Internet connectivity throughout our 
event. 
1-2 workshop organizers will be designated to facilitate the vir-
tual portion of the hybrid event. This role will oversee any technical 
and logistic issues and will communicate accordingly with on-site 
organizers. We will set up a backend communication channel such 
as Slack or Signal for both on-site and virtual workshop organizers 
to ensure smooth progress of the workshop. The Zoom meeting 
will be recorded and shared with all participants, and the organizers 
will facilitate collaborative note taking and discussion during the 
workshop. As the COVID-19 pandemic unfolds over the next year, 
we expect this hybrid workshop structure to evolve according to 
local health, social, and political conditions. 
5.2 Activities and Timing 
Our “one-day” hybrid workshop will take place over the course of 
two days with three hours each per day (see Table 1 for preliminary 
schedule). The main activities of our workshop are introductory 
presentations, a power mapping exercise, a case study presentation, 
and fnal road mapping exercise. 
The workshop will begin with introductions and brief 5 minute 
presentations by participants to orient their own contributions in 
relation to our workshop topic. We will then end the frst part 
with a power mapping exercise where the goal is to trace how our theoretical frameworks and conceptual apparatus ft with the 
diferent sites and regions we are working with. The goal of this 
activity is tracing diferent scales, sites, and actors behind racial 
and colonial violences across geopolitical contexts, such as mili-
tary, research institutions, investors, and corporation/industry. We 
hope to keep all participants in the virtual room as well as on-site 
together in order to ensure that all conversations can be captured. 
We expect that this will be a feasible arrangement given that all 
workshop organizers have taught classes bigger than 20. We will 
use a collaborative application such as Miro to visualize the power 
mapping exercise and unpack the connections between diferent 
participants in order to elucidate larger themes and patterns. Any 
kind of conversations or questions that are not captured can be in 
an alternative live document such as Google Docs or Cryptpad. 
The second part of the workshop will begin with presentations of 
case studies to ground the group in empirical examples of diferent 
transnational encounters between race, technology, and capital. 
From the case studies, we will build on the previous power mapping 
exercise to create a collective theoretical and methodological road 
map. The road map activity will distill the earlier connections and 
conversations into a shared vocabulary, methodologies, theories, 
and visions. This will serve as a draft introduction for a contribution 
to Interactions magazine. Since we are still attempting to work 
as a full group, we will ensure to carry out proper community 
agreements and protocols so that equitable participation for both 
on-site and virtual attendees is achieved. 
At the end of the workshop, participants will re-group to refect 
on their workshop experience and discuss future possibilities for 
collaboration and community. 
6 POST-WORKSHOP PLANS 
Discussions and experiences from the workshop will be archived 
on the website pending participants’ consent and consensus. We 
also invite the participants to work on brief pieces for Interactions 
Magazine in which their work and the outcome of the workshop 
will be disseminated to a wider audience. In order to stay in contact 
after the workshop and to invite potential new interested parties, 
we would like to create a mailing list. This list will be used by work-
shop organizers to disseminate information as well as to stimulate 
new collaboration opportunities, and build community. With the 
brief Interactions pieces, we hope to work with participants to de-
velop a TOCHI special issue contribution within the next two years. 
Interested participants will be informed about the current status 
via the mailing list. 
7 CALL FOR PARTICIPATION 
Triangulating Race, Capital, and Technology: This hybrid workshop 
aims to refect on the role of computing in racialization, capital-
ism, and geopolitics in transnational contexts. We seek participa-
tion by scholars across disciplines including HCI, critical race, eth-
nic, post/de-colonial, migration/border, feminist, and queer studies, 
among others. 
We welcome theoretical and empirical articulations of race, im-
perialism, and technology across locations. We invite scholars andTriangulating Race, Capital, and Technology CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
Table 1: Preliminary Workshop Schedule 
Time Activity 
Part I 
9.00 am - 9:30 am Welcome from convenors 
Introductions and brief presentations: how do you orient to the conversation 9:30 am - 10.30 am Summary of what you wrote/position 
10:30 am - 10:45 am Break and setup for power mapping activity 
10:45 am - 12:15 pm Power mapping activity (theories/sites/discussion) 
Part II 9:00 am - 10:20 am Presentations/discussion of cases 
10:20 am - 10:30 am Break 
10:30am - 11:45 am Continue power mapping to road mapping activity: where do we go from here? 
11:45 am - 12:00 pm Closing remarks and refections 
practitioners at various stages of their career to build a geographi-
cally, theoretically, and methodologically diverse cohort. We prior-
itize applications with demonstrated commitments to anti-racist 
and anti-colonial practice and inquiry and clear articulations of 
research position and stakes. 
To apply, please provide a 2-4 page position papers ( 1,500 words) 
responding to the following questions: 
• How do you locate your work? What communities do you 
serve in your scholarship? What do you hope to gain from 
this workshop? 
• What theories, imaginaries, histories, methodologies, and 
vocabularies do you draw upon to think about the relation-
ship between technology, geopolitics, capital, and power that 
enable critical engagements with transnational formations 
of race in HCI? 
• What are your research sites and/or practices that demon-
strate how technology interfaces with, operationalizes, and 
practices imperialism, nationalism, and empire? 
Position papers will be shared among participants prior to the 
workshop. Workshop activities will be archived on the website 
(http://racecapital.tech/) pending participant consent. We will pro-
vide opportunities for collaboration and special issue contributions. 
At least one author of each accepted submission must attend the 
workshop and all accepted participants must register for both the 
workshop and for at least one day of the conference. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Miriyam Aouragh and Paula Chakravartty. 2016. Infrastructures of empire: 
Towards a critical geopolitics of media and information studies. Media, Culture 
& Society 38, 4 (2016), 559–575. 
[2] Seyram Avle and Silvia Lindtner. 2016. Design (ing)’Here’and’There’ Tech En-
trepreneurs, Global Markets, and Refexivity in Design Processes. In Proceedings 
of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 2233–2245. 
[3] Seyram Avle, Silvia Lindtner, and Kaiton Williams. 2017. How methods make de-
signers. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. 472–483. 
[4] Kean Birch. 2017. Techno-economic assumptions. 
[5] Kean Birch. 2020. Technoscience rent: Toward a theory of rentiership for techno-
scientifc capitalism. Science, Technology, & Human Values 45, 1 (2020), 3–33. 
[6] Jodi A Byrd. 2011. The transit of empire: Indigenous critiques of colonialism. U of 
Minnesota Press. 
[7] Vikram Kamath Cannanure, Dilrukshi Gamage, Christian Sturm, Heike 
Winschiers-Theophilus, Juan Fernando Maestre, Naveena Karusala, Pedro Reynolds-Cuéllar, and Neha Kumar. 2021. Decolonizing HCI Across Borders. In 
Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. 1–5. 
[8] Kuan-Hsing Chen. 2010. Asia as method. Duke University Press. 
[9] Arif Dirlik. 2010. 26. ASIANS ON THE RIM: TRANSNATIONAL CAPITAL 
AND LOCAL COMMUNITY IN THE MAKING OF CONTEMPORARY ASIAN 
AMERICA. In Asian American Studies Now. Rutgers University Press, 515–539. 
[10] Paul Dourish and Scott D Mainwaring. 2012. Ubicomp’s colonial impulse. In 
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on ubiquitous computing. 133–142. 
[11] Alan Dupont. 2002. The US-China Cold War Has Already Started. Retrieved 
October 12, 2021 from https://thediplomat.com/2020/07/the-us-china-cold-war-
has-already-started/ 
[12] Julie Katherine Gibson-Graham. 1997. The end of capitalism (as we knew it): A 
feminist critique of political economy. Capital & Class 21, 2 (1997), 186–188. 
[13] Critical Platform Studies Group, Lilly Irani, Niloufar Salehi, Joyojeet Pal, Andrés 
Monroy-Hernández, Elizabeth Churchill, and Sneha Narayan. 2019. Patron or 
Poison? Industry Funding of HCI Research. In Conference Companion Publication 
of the 2019 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing. 111– 
115. 
[14] Lilly Irani, Janet Vertesi, Paul Dourish, Kavita Philip, and Rebecca E Grinter. 2010. 
Postcolonial computing: a lens on design and development. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1311–1320. 
[15] Margaret Jack and Seyram Avle. 2021. A Feminist Geopolitics of Technology. 
Global Perspectives 2, 1 (2021). 
[16] Tifany Lethabo King. 2019. The Black shoals. Duke University Press. 
[17] Cindy Lin and Silvia Margot Lindtner. 2021. Techniques of Use: Confronting Value 
Systems of Productivity, Progress, and Usefulness in Computing and Design. In 
Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
1–16. 
[18] Lisa Lowe. 2015. The intimacies of four continents. Duke University Press. 
[19] Mehari Taddele Maru. 2019. A new cold war in Africa. Retrieved October 12, 2021 
from https://www.aljazeera.com/opinions/2019/7/1/a-new-cold-war-in-africa/ 
[20] Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya-Ogburu, Angela DR Smith, Alexandra To, and Kentaro 
Toyama. 2020. Critical race theory for HCI. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–16. 
[21] Cedric J Robinson. 2020. Black Marxism, Revised and Updated Third Edition: The 
Making of the Black Radical Tradition. UNC Press Books. 
[22] Angela DR Smith, Alex A Ahmed, Adriana Alvarado Garcia, Bryan Dosono, 
Ihudiya Ogbonnaya-Ogburu, Yolanda Rankin, Alexandra To, and Kentaro Toyama. 
2020. What’s Race Got To Do With It? Engaging in Race in HCI. In Extended 
Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
1–8. 
[23] R obert Soden, David Ribes, Seyram Avle, and Will Sutherland. 2021. Time for 
historicism in CSCW: An invitation. In Proceedings of the ACM: Human-Computer 
Interaction. 
[24] Luis Suarez-Villa. 2001. The rise of technocapitalism. Science & Technology Studies 
14, 2 (2001), 4–20. 
[25] Judy Wajcman. 2006. Technocapitalism meets technofeminism: women and 
technology in a wireless world. Labour & Industry: a journal of the social and 
economic relations of work 16, 3 (2006), 7–20. 
[26] Sylvia Wynter. 2003. Unsettling the coloniality of being/power/truth/freedom: 
Towards the human, after man, its overrepresentation—An argument. CR: The 
new centennial review 3, 3 (2003), 257–337.