Design Implications for Health Technology to Support LGBTQ+ 
Community: a literature review  
Taylor Schell Martinez  
 Department of Computer Science 
University  of Michigan -  Flint  
 tschell@umich.edu Charlotte Tang  
 Department of Computer Science 
University of Michigan -  Flint  
 tcharlot@umich.edu  
ABSTRACT  
Despite being overlooked by technology designers, digital sources 
and online channels are still the most popular places for LGBTQ+ people to seek health information after medical professionals, due 
to fears of discrimination and stigma [5, 4, 6] .  Most designs still 
only ask individuals to identify as one of the  binary sex 
classifications, male or female, and assume heterosexuality, 
instantly eliminating the appropriate  options for over 10 million 
people in the  United States alone who do not fit into those 
constraints  [4].  This creates a void of information for and about 
LGBTQ+ communities.  
However, due to the lack of a more robust LGBTQ+ identification 
system , computer scientists and designers  continue to ignore a 
crucial  LGBTQ+  demographic . It also creat es inaccuracies in 
health information technologies and their resulting data sets , which 
fuels disparity and discrimination . This paper contributes to the  
healt h service research community  a set of design implications for 
integrating medically relevant categories for health information 
technology to support the collection and use of LGBTQ+ identity 
related information like current sex,  sex at birth, gender identi ty, 
sexual orientation, preferred name and pronouns  and illicit more 
constructive data collection th an the current standard binary  
male/ female sex identifier s.   
CCS CONCEPTS  
CCS  → Social and professional topics → User characteristics 
→ Sexual orientation  
CCS → Social and professional topics → User characteristics 
→ Gender  
 
KEYWORDS  
LGBTQ+ identity , health technol ogy, inclusivity , design 
implications , sexual orientation, gender  
 ACM Reference format:  
Taylor Schell Martinez and Charlotte Tang . Design Implications for H ealth 
Technology to Support LGBTQ+ Community: a literature review . In 
Proceedings of EAI PervasiveHealth 2020 – 14th EAI International 
Conference  on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3421937.3421951 
INTRODUCTION  
Designing to accommodate the full spectrum of identities provides the most accurate health information and care for all involved, the health seeker s, provider s, researcher s and designer s. According to 
Pereira and Baranauskas  (2017) , the core of the LGBT Q+ 
framework are the terms : sex, gender, and desire [3].  If health 
professionals, technologies and applications do not ask, how can 
they provide accurate health information and /or collect accurate 
data abo ut an individual?  
Expanding the binary sex data field to include a more 
contemporary, robust and accurate information  set not only allows 
for the optimization of health care and information  but may also 
help identify and reduce disparities and discriminat ory behavior  
and foster inclusivity,  further improving LGBTQ+ health care. 
Collecting LGBTQ+ identity related information would  create 
more accurate data for analysis and algorithm creation, allow more precise nuanced marketing while simultaneously expandi ng the 
ability to study the demographic more easily . Collecting LGBTQ+ 
identity information would normalize the use and collection of this 
important information.   By creating health technology that aids in 
the collection of LGBTQ+ identity related information , we can 
make health more inclusive to the needs of all individuals while  
also making the data sets more valuable.  
DESIGN IMPLICATIONS  
Increased  LGBTQ + Inclusivity  without  being  
Central  to the Design  
Sensitivity to appropriate vocabulary has been found to help create 
a positive relationship with the LGBTQ+ community [7].  
According to recent research, having gender -affirming 
identification may improve the mental health of n on-binary 
individuals. Thus, proper gender identification in other areas especially those related to health may have the same positive impact. Similar findings also revealed that participants considered the ability to affirm their name, gender and pronouns  as valuable 
aspects of digital technologies and highlighted these inputs as an 
important way to connect with game applications [8] .    
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classro om use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must  be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org . 
 
PervasiveHealth ‘20, May  18-20, 2020, Atlanta , GA,  USA  
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.  
ACM ISBN 978- 1-4503 -7532 -0/20/05…$15.00  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3421937.3421951PervasiveHealth ’20, May 2020, Atlanta  USA  
 
 
 While collecting preferred name and pronouns can lead to an 
inclusive and affirming environm ent for LGBTQ+ individuals, it 
generally creates improved inclusiveness among a broader 
audience including a variety of medical situations not limited to 
those involving LGBTQ+ individuals [2]. Nevertheless, LGBTQ+ 
individuals do not necessarily want to be the center of design even 
though they desired to be included in the design process [8].  Hence, 
when designing health technology for LGBTQ+ individuals, it is 
important to allow them to affirm thei r identity so that they can feel 
connected to the technology. C urrent ly, health technology rarely 
supports such identity inclusivity.  
LGBTQ+ Identification Optimizing health Care 
Provision and Quality   
Collecting an expanded demographic set that includes LGBTQ + 
identifiers like sexual orientation, gender identity, sex at birth, 
current sex and preferred name and pronouns is not about being 
politically or socially correct ; it is about collecting medically 
relevant information  to optimize health car e. Since 2011, the 
Institute of Medicine (IOM), the Department of Health and Human Services’ (HHS), the O ffice of National Coordination for Health 
Information Technology (ONCHIT) and the Joint Commission 
have recommended the collecti on of  sexual orientatio n and gender 
identity information. Since then,  150 additional health researchers, 
providers and organizations  have also  publicly expressed their 
support for collecting the LGBTQ+ identity information [2]. As the 
medical communi ty has repeatedly stated, LGBTQ+ identifiers are 
pertinent information directly related to quality health  care.  
LGBTQ+ Identification underpinning  Health Care 
Customization  
Without an opportunity to identify themselves , people who appear 
as one sex but identif y as another may be given the wrong , or even 
harmful information,  because basic health -related information was 
not collected or discussed. Collecting LGBTQ+ identity  related  
information allows  medical professionals to more effectively 
optimize health care for LGBTQ+ populations. Recording the 
appropriate and needed data allows health professionals and technologies to screen for organ -specific health risks as well as 
lifestyle related risks that may have been missed w ithout collecting 
LGBTQ + identity  related information [2] . Not collecting LGBTQ+ 
related information misses an opportunity for nuanced health care  
and information  while diminish ing accuracy. The medical field has 
stated LGBTQ+ identity data being  relevant and pertinent 
information for optimized health care. Thus, being researchers and 
designers , we should help facilitate a decade-old medical request 
by expanding our designs to colle ct valuable LGBTQ+ identity 
related information.  
Uncollected Identifiers compounding Data 
Inaccuracy  Many researchers discuss the difficulties of identifying members of 
the LGBTQ+ community , leading to inaccuracies in data and care 
[2]. The difficulty of identifying LGBTQ+ individuals may be due 
to a society’s failure to request  this information due to the historical 
stigma associated with being LGBTQ+. The contemporary default 
style of design that asks individuals to only identify as male or 
female contributes to LGBTQ+ people missing from the broad 
demographic data,  hence the resulting inaccuracies .  Health 
information systems that only collect binary sex and assume 
heterosexuality risk misclassifying  over 4% of the population 
inaccurately  [4].   
In addition, i t is extremely  difficult, if not impossible,  to identify 
uncollected identifiers an d information.  Therefore, such 
information should  no longer be ignored . They are important 
information to be  collected to provide not only optimized medical 
care but to reduce disparities.  Being a member of the LGBTQ+ community is something that should n ot have to be hidden, ignored 
or uncomfortable to discuss especially in a medical setting, no more 
than any other health related issue.  
Normalizing  LGBTQ+ Identifiers as Routine 
Practice  
The design of health information technology impacts how and what 
health information is collected [5] . Currently, information related 
to a person’s LGBTQ+ identity is so rarely collected that many 
medical professionals still feel hesitant and uncomfortable asking about  it [5]. However, a voiding these important health -related 
questions renders medical professional s unable to provide 
customized  and proper  health care and information to LGBTQ+ 
populations. The resulting lack of information about a person’s identity can create or compound health disparities, especially involving LGBTQ+ related health issues.  In fact, t he 
communication gap between health seeker s and provider s allows 
myths and stereotypes to continue to dominat e the LGBTQ+ health 
discourse and permeate the health messages , making it an 
imperative gap to close [5]. The disconnect between medically 
needed LGBTQ+ identifiers and those currently collected by health systems could be part of the problem, fueling some of the disparities and misinformation.   
Using LGBTQ+ identification questions daily c ould normalize the 
collection of information and possibly make medical professionals 
and health seekers more “comfortable” discussing this important 
health topic.  Thus,  we can normalize the collection of LGBTQ + 
identity pertinent questions by including them in the  design  of 
health information technology and making them a routine practice  
to provide individualized tailored content.   
LGBTQ+ Identity  reducing  Disparities   
Mainstream media homogenizes LGBTQ+ individuals into one group and focuses on their high rates of depression, self -harm, and 
suicide , further perpetuating these negative perceptions  and focalPervasiveHealth ’20, May 2020, Atlanta  USA  
 
 points  [7]. Even within the LGBTQ+ community, different 
subcategories experience different health related disparities. For 
example, i n Australia, over 72% of transgender youth experience 
depression and/or  anxiety and nearly 50% have attempted suicide  
[8]. In the USA, gay and bisexual men, despite being only 2% of 
the population, account for 50% of all new HIV diagnoses while 
90% of the newly diagnosed HIV positive transgender people  were 
African American or Latin o [2, 9, 6] .   
Lesbian women also experienced health disparities due to 
healthcare professionals inadequately addressing their awareness 
of specific sexually transmittable diseases (STIs) and the need for 
regular cervical cancer screening due to increased prevalence in 
their community  [10]. Without adequately designed health 
information technology, many lesbians and bisexual women are 
still unaware of the increased risks of bacterial and fungal STIs in their community and the importance of using barriers, cleaning sex 
toys, and discussing sexual health with their partners. This 
disjunction  demonstrates “a significant communication gap 
between marginalized (lesbian and bisexual women) and dominant 
groups (practitioners)” that le ads to unequal health outcomes [5].  
In addition to the lack of LGBTQ+ -focused health information 
technology, LGBTQ+ are often homogenized into an ever -
expanding singular generic group,  and again  mostly focuses only 
on the nega tive aspects.  High rates of STIs, suicide, depression, 
anxiety, bullying and a plethora of dating and social applications dominate the LGBTQ+ discourse.  Gathering LGBTQ+ identity 
information via health information technology including sexual 
orientation, gender identification, sex at birth, and current  sex 
enables managers and researchers to identify disparities in insurance coverage, access to care, diagnos es, treatment s, public 
health initiative effectiveness and how LGBTQ+ communities allocate resources  [2].  
LGBTQ+ Identity  reducing  Discrimination  
Previous research showed that medical professionals often used negative stereotypes or assumptions about the LGBTQ+ community , contributing to the adv erse experiences of LGBTQ+ 
individuals  [11]. As a result, m yths propagate the dominant 
discourse and a re also evident in health messages and experiences 
[5]. 82% of a survey respondents  reported  that they  actively sought  
out LGBTQ+ friendly healthcare providers in order to avoid hurtful 
assumptions and stressful interactions [11] . Not surprisingly, 
LGBTQ+ individuals want to feel comfortable in the medical settings without fear of discrimination while having  their full 
identity recognized and respected .  
Although  99% of health institutes are trying to offer more inclusive  
health care services  by including  both sexual orientation and gender 
identity in their pa tient nondiscrimination policies,  only 39% ha ve 
practices and procedures to ensure the policies were enforced [7] . 
The collection of LGBTQ+ identity information enable s managers 
and researchers to identify discrimination that takes place in local health care institutions and allow institutions to address weaknesses and discrepancies identified in the  policy and work practices [2].  
Without kn owledge of LGBTQ+ identity information,  monitoring 
the effectiveness of nondiscrimination policies is extremely 
difficult. In fact, LGBTQ+ identity information can help identify 
areas, departments, or locations that need cultural competency and sensitivity  training, making the data extremely valuable to human 
resources department s for customizing training and policies.  
Missing Identi ty leading to Missed Opportunities  
“The most salient challenge to meaningfully implementing  sexual 
orientation and gender identity data collection in the EHR is developing data input algorithm signifiers that are clinically helpful to clinicians [2] .” Since t he LGBTQ+ demographic is an untapped 
data set to use, market, sell and disseminate , using a more robust 
demographics data collection method including LGBTQ+ identity information may result in a more nuanced niche data set . However, 
the rare collection of LGBTQ+ identity information implies  missed 
opportunities of more in-depth analysis of the collected data. 
Hence, timely collection of LGBTQ+ identity data can provide extremely useful information about the  communit y and serve  
valuable insight to an under -studied  population .  
CONCLUSION  
As designers,  we can provide optimized health information and 
care, facilitate the identification of possible health disparities, collect more precise data sets for the  stakeholders, create a more 
inclusive space and normalize the collection of LGBTQ+ identity  
information while producing a better understanding of this  
demographic.  Using questions that identify LGBTQ+ individuals like current sex, sex at birth, sexual ori entation, gender 
identification, preferred name and preferred pronouns allow for the creation of more productive algorithms and in-depth data analysis.  
References  
 
[1]  D. P. Subramony, "Not in our Journals - Digital Media 
Technologies and the LGBTQI Community," TechTrends, 
vol. 62, pp. 354 -363, 2018.  
[2]  C. Donald and J. M. Ehrenfeld, "The Opportunity for 
Medical Systems to Reduce Health Disparities Among 
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex Patients," 
Journal of Medical System s, vol. 39, no. 178, 2015.  
[3]  G. C. Pereira and M. C. C. Baranauskas, "Supporting people 
on fighting lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) 
prejudice: a cirtical codesign process," in IHC 2017: 
Proceedings of the XVI Brazilian Symposium on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems , Joinville Brazil, 2017.  
[4]  S. M. Schueller, J. F. Hunter, C. Figueroa and A. Aguilera, 
"Use of Digital Mental Health for Marginalized and 
Underserved Populations," Current Treatment Options 
Pscychology, vol. 6, pp. 243 -255, 2019.PervasiveHealth ’20, May 2020, Atlanta  USA  
 
 
 [5]  S. L. Faulkner an d P. J. Lannutti, "Representations of lesbian 
and bisexual women's sexual and relational health in online 
video and text -based sources," Computers in Human 
Behavior, vol. 63, pp. 916 -921, 2016.  
[6]  A. Ventuneac, S. A. John, T. H. Whitfield, B. Mustanski  and 
J. T. Parsons, "Preferences for Sexual Health Smartphone 
App Features Among Gay and Bisexual Men," AIDS and 
Behavior, vol. 22, pp. 3384 -3394, 2018.  
[7]  B. W. Hawkins, M. Morris, T. Nguyen, J. Siegel and E. 
Vardell, "Advancing the conversation: next  steps for lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, trans, and queer (LGBTQ) health sciences 
librarianship," Journal of Medical Library Association, vol. 
105, no. 4, pp. 316 -327, 2017.  
[8]  P. Strauss, H. Morgan, D. W. Toussaint, A. Lin, S. Winter 
and Y. Perry, "Trans and gender diverse young people's 
attitudes towards game- based digital mental health 
interventions: A qualitative investigation," Internet 
Interventions, vol. 18, no. 100280, 20 19.  
[9]  M. Price -Feeney, M. L. Ybarra and K. J. Mitchell, "Health 
Indicators of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Other Sexual 
Minority (LGB+) Youth Living in Rural Communities," The 
Journal of Pediatrics, vol. 205, pp. 236 -243, February 2019.  
[10]  M. Bjorkman and K. Malterud, "Lesbian women's 
experiences with health care: a qualitative study.," 
Scandinavian Journal of Primary Health Care, vol. 27, no. 
4, pp. 238 -43, 2009.  
[11]  S. D. Howard, MD, K. L. Lee, MA, A. G. Nathan, MPH, H. 
C. Wenger, MD, M. H. Chin, MD MPH and S. C. Cook, PhD, 
"Healthcare Experiences of Transgender People of Color," 
Journal of General Internal Medicine, vol. 10, no. 34, pp. 
2068- 74, 2019.  
[12]  R. Shrestha, S. H. Lim, F. L. Altice, M. Copenhaver, J. A. 
Wickersham, R. Sai f, M. A. A. Halim and A. Kamarulzaman, 
"Use of Smartphone to Seek Sexual Health Information 
Online Among Malaysian Men Who Have Sex with Men 
(MSM): Implicationsfor mHealth Intervention to Increase 
HIV Testing and Reduce HIV Risks," Journal of Community 
Health, vol. 45, pp. 10 -19, 2020.  
[13]  J. M. White Hughto, J. E. Pachankis and A. I. Eldahan, "You 
Can’t Just Walk Down the Street and Meet Someone”: The 
Intersection of Social –Sexual Networking Technology, 
Stigma, and Health Among Gay and Bisexual Men in the 
Small City," American Journal of Men’s Health, vol. 11, no. 
3, pp. 726 -736, 2017.  
[14]  I. Kuo, T. Liu, R. Patrick, C. Trezza and L. Bazerman, "Use 
of an mHealth Intervention to Improve Engagement in HIV 
Community Based Care Among Persons Recently Re leased 
from a Correctional Facility in Washington, DC: A Pilot 
Study," AIDS and Behavior, vol. 23, pp. 1016-1031, 2019.