Analysis  of Value  Orientation  Framework  of Junior High 
Chinese Textbooks 
He Shanxiu  
SEGI University  
NO.9,JLN TEKNOLOGI  
TMN SAINS SGOR  
KOTA DAMANSARA PJU 5  
47810 SELANGOR  Malaysia  
heshanxiu17@qq.com  Dr Floren ce Kuek  
SEGI University  
NO.9,JLN TEKNOLOGI  
TMN SAINS SGOR  
KOTA DAMANSARA PJU 5  
47810 SELANGOR  Mala ysia 
florencekuekcw@segi.edu.my  
 
 
ABSTRACT  
This paper analyzes the value orientation framework of junior 
high school Chinese Language textbooks.  The value orientation 
framework is designed to examine  three major dimensions  of 
human relat ionships , namely, "man and himself ", "man and 
society" , and "man and nature".  The aim of the framework is to 
evaluate the  theme s in junior high Chinese textbooks. The  
classification of moral value orientation  reveals that China’s 
national guidelines paid significant attention to t he cultivation of 
students ' morality, aesthetic s, and appreciation of nature . 
Nonetheless , the researcher noticed that but there was a lack of 
themes  such as the virtue of thrift iness , emphasis on innovation , 
and the concept of  ecological sustainability . Moreover, the 
interpretation of the value orientation in these textbooks  lacks 
contemporaneity.  Furthermore, hot topics such as the inequality 
between men and women, which is prevalent  in certain provincial 
and rural areas of China were also not listed in the national 
guidelines on junior high textbooks  The discussion, which is 
stemmed from  an analysis of the framework derived from  “The  
Compulsory Education  Chinese Curriculum Standards  (2011 
edition) ", and the "Core Competence  in Chinese Student 
Development  (revised in 201 6)" is believed to be good references 
to all educational stakeholders, especially the curriculum panels of 
China’s junior high textbooks . 
CCS Concepts  
• Information systems ➝Social and professional topics.  
Keywords  
Value O rientation ; Chinese Textbooks;  China’s Junior  High 
School s; Analysis Framework.  1. INTRODUCTION  
Chinese textbook s for the junior high schools are  not merely 
vehicles that  facilitate the acquisition of  cultural knowledge in 
students’  mother tongue  [1]. The content of the language 
textbook s also  reflects a particular value orientation to a certain 
extent. Whether these value orientations conform to the prevailing 
thoughts of the times , it has a significant impact on students ' 
worldview and value judgment  [2]. The selection of the content of 
these textbook s ties in closely to the promotion  of a selected set of 
values  [3]. This value choice is by no means neutral . Nonetheless,  
only literature  that are considered appropriate in its value 
orientation by the curriculum panel  will be incorporated  in the  
junior high  textbook  [4]. The compilation of textbooks is the 
embodiment and execution  of China’s  national will . It has a 
profound impact on the training of national talents. Therefore, the 
review would be  rigorous , especially for textbooks on Chinese  
language, moral and legal systems, and history. Chinese language 
textbooks are customized in their writing and content . In the 
process of writing, the mainstream values of the society a s well as  
the traditional culture of the nation will certainly be incorporated  
into the  junior high  textbooks. Th us, Chinese language textbooks 
are not only a carrier of knowledge, skills a nd culture , but also the 
medium of values  and cultural disposition . At the same time, the 
selection of main characters  and personalities  is equally  essential 
as the selection of the texts . The characters portrayed in textbooks 
are vivid representation of t he Chinese. While cherishing China’s  
traditional culture , the  mainstream social values are normally 
reflected in the emotions, behaviors, moral qualities, and values  of 
the characters in the respective passages . Therefore, the characters 
in textbooks are n ot only a meaningful way to present educational 
content and transfer knowledge, but also  specific means to convey 
value orientation to their readers, and in this context, the students. 
Textbooks are a powerful tool to communicate values . As an 
essential teaching resource, they play a central role in the Chinese 
curriculum.   
2. THE STATEMENT OF PROBLEM  
Textbooks are named  so as they are the main teaching materials 
that are written according to the required  curriculum standards  of 
the country . Very often, they reflect the  mainstream ideas  of the 
governing authorities as well as society of a certain era . In the 
21st century global society, multiculturalism has profoundly 
affected the life of school education and teaching . As the world 
interacts  ideologically and geopolitically, multicultural education 
in schools has somewhat become a  subject of  concern of the 
stakeholders in education . Under the classification of value 
orientation, the cultivation of students' morality, aesthetic s, and 
appreciat ion of nature are of key concerns  [5]. However , the Permission to make digi tal or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or  classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed  for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full  citation on the first page . Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others  than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise,  or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific  permission and/or a fee. Reque st permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org.  
WSSE 2020 , September 25 –27, 2020, Chengdu, China  
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.  
ACM ISBN 978 -1-4503 -8787 -3/20/09…$15.00  
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3425329.3425347  
151researcher of this study noticed  that topics such as thrift, 
innovation, and ecological sustainability  are in the lacking  [6, 7] . 
Moreover, the interpretation of the moral value theme s lacks 
contemporaneity  [8, 9] . Hot topics such as the inequality between 
men and women, which is prevalent in certain provincial and rural 
areas of China were also not listed in the national guidelines on 
junior high textbooks . 
Chinese language textbooks  are compiled according to guided 
curriculum standards of the nation and mainstream social ideas. 
The textbook s are good  resources to lay a cohesive moral concept 
amidst young people in the classrooms . The junior high school 
Chinese textbooks are subject -oriented textbooks explicitly 
designed for the junior high school stage. To certain extent, 
Chinese textbooks embody a high degree of social ideology . They 
are the ultimate reflect ors of mainstream culture defined by the 
curriculum panel , the refraction of the value orientation  of an era , 
and the final reflection of the comprehensive social ideology. Any 
gap in the content in moral emphasis in the textbooks will 
therefore, be of prime concern of th e stakeholders in Chinese 
education . 
3. RESEARCH QUESTIONS  
The scope of this study is produce a framework that assesses the  
value orientation in Chinese  language textbooks, especially in 
their cognitive and value  aspects:  (a) Cognitive , as the curriculum 
intends to promote the development of students’ cognition; and, (b) 
Value, as the enacted texts  aim to cultivate  students ' moral and 
aesthetic qualities.  This paper studies the "value structure" by 
analyzing the value orientation elements  and themes in  the 
Chinese  textbooks . This study examines the values  and thematic 
categorization in the Chinese textbooks by referring to two 
national guideline s as its evaluation yardstick:  
《Compulsory Education Chinese Curriculum Standards  (2011 )》 
《Core Competence in Chinese Student Development (2016 
Edition)》 
An incorporated value orientation framework for the assessment 
of Chinese junior high textbooks will be given in section 4.3. Last 
but not least, the obvious omissions or lacking in the 
abovementioned will be discussed in the 5th section of this paper . 
The research questions of the study are as follows:  
1. What are the  Value -oriented categories in the "Compulsory 
Education Chinese Cur riculum Standards" (2011 ) and the “Core 
Competence in Chinese Student Development (2016)” ? 
2. Stemming from the two in the ab ovementioned, w hat would be 
the incorporated Value Orientation Framework for the an alysis of 
Junior Chinese Textbook ? 
3. What themes might be lacking from the point of view of this 
study ? What might be the rationale to include these themes?  
3.1 Definition of Terms  
The value orientation is the standpoint of a  person in dealing with 
his or her ethical dilemma , personal and interpersonal conflicts, 
and, choices pertaining to issues of morality . It is an essential 
category of value philosophy. In other words, value orientation 
entails the principles of right and wrong abided by an individual 
or a social group. It relates to a certain behavioral tendencies, 
pertinence, and purpose. Nevert heless, it is a  defining factor in a 
person’s moral character and life choices. Hence, it bears certain 
implications upon one’s life and development. A person’s  value orientation will dictate the manner one relates with oneself and 
with others.  Whether  a person’s  value orientation leans towards 
positive or negative, and, abiding to the norm or against the norms 
of a society,  it is most foretelling about the person. The value 
orientation is most fundamental belief of human beings.  
3.2 Significance of the Study  
This paper is expected to contribute the understanding of  the 
themes of value orientation in the Chinese junior high language 
textbooks .  The research finding is a framework that will serve as 
an instrument for assessing the values orientation reflected in 
these textbooks, their levels of conformity  to China’s  national 
guidelines and the mainstream values of the society . It will also 
become the benchmark to reveal any  lacking in the textbooks 
being assessed. The framework will be of great import ance to 
infer the  directi on of improvement  in textbook curriculum . 
4. ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK OF THE 
CHINESE  LANGUAGE  TEXTBOOKS  
The paper constructs the analysis framework of Chinese language 
textbooks value orientation based on "Compulsory Education 
Chinese Curri culum Standards" (2011), and " Core Competence in 
Chinese Student Development " (2016). It categoriz es the 
characters in the storylines and content s of the textbooks 
according to three major dimensions of human relationships, 
namely, "man and himself", "man and society" , and "man and 
nature".   The study will  analyze whether the contents  meet the 
value orientation and yardsticks of the national guidelines . The 
main categories  of the value orientation  will be examined, while  
existing problems  will be further studied   
4.1 Requirements for Values  Orientation  in 
the "Compulsory Education Chinese 
Curriculum Standards " (2011 Edition)  
Curriculum standards are the basis for textbook compilation, 
teaching, evaluation , and examination propositions . They  reflect 
the basic requirements of the country for students at different 
stages in terms of knowledge and skills, processes and methods, 
emotional attitudes , and values. The guidelines in the 
"Compulsory Education  Chinese Curricul um Standards " (2011) 
stipulat ed the course standard, course design ideas, course 
objectives and content, a s well as  the recommended modules for 
teaching materials  in junior high textbooks .  
The basic concept of the course: The Chinese language course 
should stimulate and nurture students ' ideological and affectionate 
love for the national  language  of China , and promote the 
harmonious development of students through the influence of 
distinctive  culture so that students  can improve their ideological 
and aesthetic appeal, and  eventually groomed into individuals of 
pleasant  and healthy characters . Attach ing importance to the 
ideological and affectionate  aspects  of Chinese language teaching 
and learning is rather iconic in China’s educational system. 
Chinese language as the bear er of cultural tradition an d 
revolutionary medium, plays  the leading role in the socialist core 
value system . Embedded with  the universal  ideal of socialism 
with Chinese characteristics, these textbooks reflect  the spirit of 
the times . With reform and inno vation as its  core, its curriculum 
presents  a socialist outlook on honor and disgrace, shaping  
ideological and moral customs  that will strengthen the people of 
the country .  
Course design ideas : Under the guidance of Deng Xiaoping 
Theory and the important t enets  of the "Three Represents ," 
152progress and  development form  the national will. The junior high 
textbooks reflect national creativity and cohesion, highly 
beneficial to the young people in their overall  development in 
ethos , pathos  and aesthet ics. Moral orientation lay s the foundation 
for the lifelong development of students.   
Course objectives and content : Chinese language learning should 
enhance students’  patriotism, collectivism, socialist ideology , 
morality and aesthetic appeal . Besides, it  should be beneficial to 
the development of one’s  personality, innovation  and cooperative 
spirit . In the long run , it should impress upon its learners a 
positive attitude towards life and a proper  outlook and moral 
values . It recognize s the riches and depths of Chinese culture and 
promotes  the learning of tested  wisdom.  
The recommended modules for teaching materials : The textbook 
should reflect the characteristics of the times  and modern 
consciousness, taking concerns of society,  people , and nature . 
Besides , the understand ing and respect of the different cultures  
will be emphasized in order to shape a healthy  perception of the 
world,  outlook on life, and values. The teaching materials should 
focus on inheriting and disseminating  the uniqu e culture and 
revolutionary traditions of the Chinese nation, which will help 
strengthen students ' national self -esteem and patriotism.   
The Chinese language course play s the leading role in the socialist 
core value system , promoting th e socialist concept of honor and 
disgrace. To list, t he core values of socialism advocate prosperity, 
democracy, civilization, harmony, freedom, equality, justice, the 
rule of law, patriotism, dedication, integrity, and friendliness.  The 
emphasis on prosperity, d emocracy, civilization, harmony  are 
value orientation at the national level , while  equality, justice, and 
the rule of law a re tenets of  the social level. Patriotism, dedication, 
integrity, and friendliness are values stipulated for individual -level. 
Here , the value orientation of integrity, friendliness, patriotism, 
and dedication is extracted. The socialist concept of honor and 
disgrace advocates " the love for the motherland, serv ice to  the 
people, embrace of  science, diligence , national unity, spirit of 
commanderie , honest y, trustworthiness , compliance with  the laws 
and regulations , and, hard work ." 954/5000  
Based on the above mentioned , the value orientation categories of 
"Compulsory Education  Chinese Curriculum Standards " are 
summarized as  in Table 1 :  
 
Table 1. Value -oriented categories in the "Compulsory 
Education Chinese Curriculum Standards " (2011 Edition)  
People and 
Self 1. Courage to innovate ; 2. Scientific spirit ; 
3. Aesthetic appeal ; 4. Hard work  
People and 
Society  1. Love and dedication ; 2. Integrity and 
friendliness ; 3. Unity and mutual assistance ; 4. 
Cooperati ve spirit ; 5. Love for the motherland ; 6. 
Cultural self -confidence ; 7. Compliance with 
laws and regulations ; 8. International 
understanding  
People and 
Nature  1. Love of nature ; 2. Environment al friendly  
 
4.2 Requirements for Cultivating Values in 
"Core Competence in Chinese Student 
Development " (2016)  
In September 2016, the "Core Competence in Chinese Student 
Development " were announced , which proposed the overall  framework and primary  connotation of Chinese student 
development core literacy.   
The core literacy of student development is the stipulated  qualities 
and critical abilities that students  should possess  to meet the needs 
of their lifelong development and social development. It is the 
specification of the education and training objectives according to  
the Socialist core values and the Party's education policy. 
Refinement and tightly revolve around the fundamental task of 
Lideshuren' s education , i.e., the education of core competence .  
The core qualities of student development are divided into three 
aspects: "cultural foundation, independent development, and 
social participation ", which are comprehensively expressed as six 
elements of  "humanistic heritage, scientific spirit, learning to learn, 
healthy spirit, responsibility, practical innovation", detailing  
eighteen basic points including "aesthetic appeal, rational thinking, 
critical questioning, learning, sound personality, social 
responsibility, national identity, international understanding, labor 
awareness." The Core Literacy is a comp rehensive exercise  of 
students' knowledge, skills, emotions, attitudes, values, and so 
forth.  The three dimensions of "person and self, person and 
society, person and nature," form the value orientation of 
"Chinese students' development core literacy."  
4.3 Analysis Framework of Value Orientation 
of Junior High  School Textbooks  
This paper presents  an analysis framework for the value 
orientation of Chinese textbooks in junior high schools in the 
Mainland  with reference to the value orientation categories of 
"Compulsory Education Chinese Curriculum Standards" (2011 
edition) and " Chinese  Student Development Core Literacy" 
(2016).  The integration proces s includes the merger of themes  by 
eliminati on of those with  overlapping  meanings  or similarities . 
For instance , "hard work" and "labor consciousness" are merged 
into " Diligence ," "love and dedication" and " commitment " are 
merged into " Commitment ," "love for the motherland," "cultural 
confidence" and "national identity" are merged into "National 
identity". Finally, the following value orientation framework for 
the examination of t he junior middle school textbooks  is yielded , 
as shown in table 2 : 
 
Table 2.  Category of Value Orientation Analysis of Junior 
Chinese Textbook  
People and 
Self 1. Scientific spirit ; 2. Innovation ; 3. Diligence;  4. 
Self-esteem and self -discipline ; 5. Confiden ce and 
optimis m; 6. Perseverance and courage;  7. Work 
ethics;  8. Aesthetic appeal ; 9. Learning and re-
learning  
People and 
Society  1. Filial piety  and respect  for the elderly;  2. 
Gratitude ; 3. Forgiving ; 4. Honest y and 
friendliness; 5. Unity and mutual assistance ; 6. 
Cooperation spirit ; 7. Dedication; 8. Commitment ; 
9. National identity ; 10. International 
understanding ; 11. Compliance with laws and 
regulations ; 12. Freedom and equality  13. Fairness 
and Justice  
People and 
Nature  1. Love  of nature ; 2. Respect  of life; 3. 
Environment al friendly  
 
1535. THE OMISSIONS AND LACKING OF 
THEMES IN THE INCORPORATED 
FRAMEWORK BASED ON NATIONAL 
GUIDELINES (2011, 2016)  
The researcher of this study noticed that at least four themes of 
significance were omitted or missing from the incorporated value 
orientation frame work  derived from the national guidelines in 
2011 and 2016.  
First, there was no mentioning of the virtue of th riftiness or 
frugality . China as one of world’s fast -growing trading and export 
countries in the world is undergoing tremendous social -economic 
transformation. The coastal provincial is the most obvious 
beneficiaries of exponential economic growth. However, this 
phenomenon of “socialism with Chinese characteristics” has its 
share of worrying reality. The modern or postmodern Chinese 
society has emb raced pragmatism and consumerism in the pursuit 
of wealth and riches. Inflation in China and the extremely high -
cost of living today have never deterred the trends of excessive 
spending and waste. Chinese traditional values of “Th rifts and 
Wise Financial P lanning” in Moism, proposed by Mozi (470BC -
391BC) and a school of Confucianism by Xunzi (310BC -235BC) 
seem to have gone down the drain. The phenomenon is rather 
worrying. Yet the theme of thriftiness or frugality was not 
included in any of the stipulated g uidelines in the value 
orientation framework.  
Second, 21st century living calls for a f orward -looking  disposition . 
While China as a nation has transformed from agricultural 
dependent to mix ture of manufacturing and t echnological -
dependen t, novelty and innovation have never been the brand 
name for China, except perhaps, in the telco industry.  For the sake 
of preparing the young people  for the world of tomorrows, 
innovation should definitely be among the new emphasis an d 
direction of Chinese education. This, again, has found to be 
missing in the value orientation framework as shown in 4.3.    
Third, issues such as global warming and worldwide e cological  
disasters have altogether become a clarion call to mankind on the 
urgency of concern over the ecological sustainability of our 
mother earth. However, it is rather clear that the current value 
orientation guidelines about junior high textbooks have only 
touched briefly on the idea of “environmental friendly ”. The 
education on the accountability of mankind in the sustainability of 
our ecolog y and  balance of the eco -system has yet to  be seen in its 
themes and curriculum planning.     
Last but not least, the inequality between men and women , which 
is rather prevalent  in certain provincial and rural areas  in China, is 
an obvious setback of a progressive nation. To uplift the 
discrimination on women is a much -needed measurement on 
talent management. Besides, i t is the role of the education to 
counter  this deeply -rooted social preco nception . It is therefore 
essential for the value orientation framework to include gender 
themes  in the education of young minds.   
6. SUMMARY  
The Chinese language textbook s are not only the carrier of mother 
tongue language  education in China, but also the bearer  of cultural 
legacy and knowledge for Chinese. This paper presents an assessment framework  for the study of the value  orientation  in 
Chinese junior high textbooks, examining the  value orientation  
with reference to th e national guidelines . The working  method is 
by thematic extraction  of the embedded values in the Chinese 
language course in junior high schools  as per the guidelines . The 
framework will become the instrumentation in evaluati ng and 
analy zing the value orie ntation in the Chinese junior high 
textbooks .  The framework  would serve as an assessment tool to 
examine the level of conformity of the textbook s to the national 
guidelines as well as the mainstream value tenets of society in 
today’s China. It will also s erves as a reliable reference in the 
process  for editing and text selection for the Chinese textbooks 
editorial board . However, this paper also reminds that there are 
obvious omissions and lacking of themes in the incorporated 
framework based on the nation al guidelines (2011, 2016). The 
research findings are therefore brought forward to the attention of 
all stakeholder in Chinese education.  
7. REFERENCES  
[1] Zhonghua Li, "The Plight of College Chinese Teaching and 
the Countermeasures," International  Journal of Information 
and Education Technology vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 294 -296, 2012  . 
[2] Gary Cheng, Julia Chen, Dennis Foung, Vincent Lam, and 
Michael Tom, "Towards Automatic Classification of Teacher 
Feedback on Student Writing," International Journal of 
Information and Education Technology vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 342 -
346, 2018 . 
[3] Shafqat Hameed and Atta Badii, "Effectiveness of 
Knowledge Management Functions in Improving the Quality 
of Education in Higher Education Inst itutions," International 
Journal of Information and Education Technology vol. 2, no. 
4, pp. 319 -323, 2012. . 
[4] Carolina Ferrer, "Data Mining the Humanities: The Impact of 
"French Theory " on Literary Studies," International Journal 
of Information and Education  Technology vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 
374-377, 2012 . 
[5] Dale, N. et al. 2001. Writing a textbook: walking the gauntlet. 
Proceedings of the thirty -second SIGCSE technical 
symposium on Computer Science Education  (Charlotte, 
North Carolina, USA, Feb. 2001), 408 –409. 
[6] Dale, N.B. 2010. Textbooks: how we choose them, how we 
use them, shall we lose them? Proceedings of the Twelfth 
Australasian Conference on Computing Education - Volume 
103 (Brisbane, Australia, Jan. 2010), 3 –8. 
[7] Li, X. and Croft, W.B. 2001. Evaluating questio n-answering 
techniques in Chinese. Proceedings of the first international 
conference on Human language technology research  (San 
Diego, Mar. 2001), 1 –6. 
[8] Walker, H.M. 2011. The role of textbooks. ACM Inroads . 2, 
1 (Feb. 2011), 14 –16. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1 145/1929887.1929892.  
[9] Wang, Z. et al. 2013. The Idiom Investigation of Chinese 
Undergraduate Textbook and the Extraction of Common 
Used Idioms. Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE/WIC/ACM 
International Joint Conferences on Web Intelligence (WI) 
and Intelligent Age nt Technologies (IAT) - Volume 03  (USA, 
Nov. 2013), 208 –212. 
 
154