“So Close, yet So Far”: Exploring Sexual-minority Women’s
Relationship-building via Online Dating in China
Yichao Cui
Cornell Tech
USA
yc793@cornell.eduNaomi Yamashita
Kyoto University
Japan
naomiy@acm.org
Mingjie Liu
The University of Texas at Austin
USA
jay_liu@utexas.eduYi-Chieh Lee
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
Taiwan
ejli.uiuc@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Sexual-minority women (SMWs) in China are often subject to strong
stigmatization and tend to have limited opportunities to connect
with other SMWs in offline contexts. Although dating apps help
them connect and seek social support, little is known about SMWs’
practices of self-disclosure and connection-building through those
apps. To address this gap, we interviewed 43 SMW dating-app
users in China. We found that these SMWs developed distinctive
self-disclosure strategies, such as posting non-facial photos and
implicitly disclosing their whereabouts by blending location infor-
mation into photos that only those in the know could understand,
to avoid interference from aggressive acquaintances and other risks
of unintentional disclosure of their SMW identities. Moreover, they
used dating apps not only to recognize other SMWs offline and
build relationships with them, but to exchange emotional support
in the process of SMW identity development. Our findings have de-
sign implications for supporting SMWs and improving their online
dating experiences.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →Empirical studies in HCI .
KEYWORDS
Sexual-minority Women; Relationship Building; Online Dating
ACM Reference Format:
Yichao Cui, Naomi Yamashita, Mingjie Liu, and Yi-Chieh Lee. 2022. “So Close,
yet So Far”: Exploring Sexual-minority Women’s Relationship-building via
Online Dating in China. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’22), April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3517624
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
©2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9157-3/22/04. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.35176241 INTRODUCTION
Over the past decade, lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT)
populations received increasing public attention, and strove for im-
provement of their social acceptance, access to healthcare, and
economic empowerment [ 60]. Nevertheless, worldwide, these pop-
ulations still face challenges ranging from unequal treatment in em-
ployment and housing to denial of legal rights and violence [ 11,22].
In some Asian countries, due to traditional cultures, religions, and
lack of legal protections, social discrimination against and marginal-
ization of LGBT people is deep-rooted and prevalent [ 2,44,59]. In
China in particular, sexual-minority women (SMWs)1are faced
with the twin challenge of high vulnerability and low visibility:
that is, they struggle for recognition within LGBT movements [ 17],
while enduring widespread social prejudice [ 72,73] and lack of
public attention [ 17,37]. Unsurprisingly, in these circumstances,
many SMWs in China feel isolated [ 18], depressed [ 45], and stressed
about their sexual orientations [52, 64].
Dating apps can serve as an important space in which they can
disclose their sexual orientations [ 64], develop and experiment with
their identities [ 29], and find community-based support [ 48], while
also socializing with other app users not only in online contexts
but also offline [ 29,64]. In Mainland China, dating apps exclusively
for the SMW population (e.g., Rela, LesPark, LesDo)2have be-
come important platforms for SMWs in search of community and
relationships, in part because doing so is very difficult in offline
contexts [ 18,52]. However, when using such dating apps, SMWs
in China are often faced with a dilemma: their need to connect
with others requires them to reveal both their sexual orientations
and their offline social identities [ 64], and thus conflicts with their
need to cope with aggressive interference and risks of unintentional
disclosure [52, 64].
Prior work on dating apps that has mainly focused on LGBT
communities in Western contexts has explored self-disclosure tech-
niques and concerns, and showed that online dating is an important
pathway to LGBT relationship-building [ 7,26] and identity devel-
opments [ 25,29]. However, relatively few prior studies have investi-
gated how stigmatized populations use such platforms, particularly
1We borrow this term from National LGBT Health Education Center[ 13] - ”Sexual
minority women (SMW) describes the broad group of women who identify as lesbian,
bisexual, queer, questioning, and other non-heterosexual identities, as well as women
who have same-gender partners but identify as straight.”
2Rela: www.rela.me; LesPark: www.lespark.cn; LesDo: www.lesdo.cnCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Yichao Cui, Naomi Yamashita, Mingjie Liu, and Yi-Chieh Lee
for relationship-building, in markedly different cultural contexts
– including Chinese culture that tends to value stereotypical fam-
ily roles and thus intensifies users’ concerns about unintentional
disclosure of one’s homosexuality [44, 52, 66].
As such, the main goal of this study is to understand what should
be counted as essential to SMWs safe disclosure of their sexual ori-
entations and building of social relationships in Mainland Chinese
online environments. To that end, we conducted semi-structured
interviews with 43 self-identified SMW interviewees in China who
had used or were still using SMW-specific dating apps. We did
not limit ourselves to users of specific apps, but in the event, our
participants used only three: Rela, LesDo, and LesPark. To explore
their strategies for and concerns about using these dating apps,
our interview questions focused on factors that encouraged the
interviewees to use such apps, or discouraged them from doing so;
their practices of and concerns about online self-disclosure; and
how they engaged in relationship-building in or through the apps.
Our findings indicate that these dating apps provide an impor-
tant space in which Chinese women can disclose their lesbianism
or bisexuality. In addition to this purpose, and of course their cen-
tral purpose of connecting with other SMWs, the apps are used
for exchanging emotional support as part of a wider process of
identity development. Our interviewees deployed implicit ways
of disclosing their identities and locations, while striving to avoid
family interference and protecting the outwardly heterosexual ap-
pearance of their daily lives. Additionally, they used the dating apps
in novel ways: for instance, to help them identify whether someone
they had met offline was also an SMW. Finally, we discuss ways in
which the focal SMW dating apps are considered insufficient both
for relationship development and privacy protection by SMWs in
China, and offer design insights on how to improve them.
This paper’s main contributions are as follows. First, it unpacks
stigmatized Chinese SMW dating-app users’ self- disclosure deci-
sions, and in particular, how such decisions are shaped by the desire
to connect to similar people, and by a cultural context featuring
aggressive family interference and related risks of unintentional
disclosure. Second, it reveals distinctive ways in which stigmatized
Chinese SMW users use these apps to build offline relationships,
exchange emotional support, and develop their identities. Lastly, its
findings provide insights for designing safer spaces for stigmatized
users’ networking.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 LGBT People’s Challenges in China
Recent decades have been marked by progress in social acceptance
and policy support for LGBT people [ 60,68]. This is especially
true in Western countries, notably the US and UK [ 60]. However,
challenges to the mental and economic wellbeing of LGBT people
still persist, especially for those living in rural areas [ 22,35,36].
LGBT population living in China and some other Asian countries
are no exception to this challenge [ 54,68]. Moreover, LGBT people
in China encounter distinctive sets of challenges, such as stigmati-
zation that stems from Asian culture and aggressive family inter-
ference [2, 44, 74].
LGBT people in China tend to be isolated, both publicly and pri-
vately [10, 52, 72, 73]. And, as in many other Asian countries (e.g.,South Korea, Japan, Indonesia, Malaysia, Vietnam, and the Philip-
pines) [ 44,74], the law in China remains largely silent on the topic
of SMWs’ rights [ 6]. Though homosexual acts were officially decrim-
inalized in 1997 [ 10,73], China’s government maintains a Three
No’s policy on homosexuality: "No approval, no disapproval, and
no promotion" [6]. In practice, this means that same-sex marriage,
adoption by same-sex couples, and commercial surrogacy do not
and are not expected to receive government endorsement [ 58,72].
The situation is made more difficult by the fact that Chinese
values strongly emphasize social harmony [ 42,44,66]. In this con-
spectus, the goals of the individual tend to be viewed as subordinate
to those of the social group, and most group members are expected
to play a stereotypical role of a social group member [ 66]. The other
side of this coin is that membership of a social group labeled as caus-
ing disharmony might cast a negative light on one’s entire social
group [ 9,66]. Thus, coming out to one’s social circle may represent
a violation of social norms [ 44,58], and many people would feel
strong obligations to seek information about, judge, and intervene
in the affairs of LGBT others as a means of maintaining in-group
harmony [ 1,16,39]. This emphasis on maintaining harmony rein-
forces social stigma against LGBT people in China and has major
negative impacts on their private lives, including strong feelings of
pressure to comply with heterosexual norms [ 58]. Therefore, they
tend to conceal their sexual orientations [ 58,72] and even enact
heterosexual behavior within their social circles [18, 52].
Family pressure is widely viewed as Chinese SMWs’ most per-
vasive and intense issue [ 38,39,56]. A United Nations Develop-
ment Program survey published in 2016 reported that no more
than 15% of China’s LGBT individuals had disclosed their sexual
identity to their families [ 56]. This family pressure appears to be
intertwined with the high value Chinese culture places on main-
taining family harmony by fulfilling the filial responsibility to raise
offspring [ 58,73]. China’s one-child policy, which operated from
1980 until 2015, would have arguably intensified existing pressures,
insofar as many SMWs are the lone child in their families, and per-
ceived by their parents as the only hope for continuing the family
line [ 10,38]. Thus, some SMWs marry other LGBT people of the
opposite sex, a phenomenon known as formality marriage , and
have offspring in these marriages to maintain “harmony”, if only
superficially [ 47,58]. Additionally, some families compel their SMW
members to undergo conversion therapy: treatment, conducted by
unlicensed providers, that aims to change a person’s sexual ori-
entation by means of hypnosis, drugs, acupuncture and electric
shock [1, 65].
As a result of their public and private isolation, SMWs in China
are disproportionately prone to mental-health issues [ 18,45]. More-
over, it is not easy for them to obtain appropriate support, since
China’s provision of medical assistance tailored to the LGBT com-
munity – to the extent it acknowledges that community at all – is
focused on HIV/AIDS prevention for gay men [17, 37].
2.2 LGBT People on Social Media
A large body of HCI and CSCW research has shown that social
media play an important role in stigmatized populations’ exchange
of information and social support [ 4,29,32,61]. This is no less
true for LGBT users. For example, Haimson et al. [ 32] found that“So Close, yet So Far”: Exploring Sexual-minority Women’s Relationship-building via Online Dating in China CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
support gained through their Facebook networks helped mitigate
transgender users’ transition-related stress. Prior research has also
shown that LGBT people use social-media platforms to construct
their identities by observing other LGBT users’ practices and so-
cializing with them [ 29,35,50]; to explore and experiment with
self-disclosure as their identity evolves over time [ 29,54]; and to
engage in teaching others about their identity [29].
2.2.1 LGBT Identity Development on Social Media. Social media
can serve as a safe space for LGBT youths to explore their sexual
identities and genders [ 50]. Prior research has indicated that LGBT
users’ sexual-identity development is facilitated by participating
in, communicating on, and learning from social media [ 29,50]. For
instance, Fox et al. [ 29] found that social media played an important
role for LGBT users as a place to learn general LGBT-related in-
formation and about the behaviors and experiences of other LGBT
users, as well as to experiment with and explore their emerging
identities. LGBT individuals’ identity development generally in-
volves different stages in which they have to consciously navigate
the emergence and disclosure of their identity [ 29,67]. These stages
consist of seeking information pertinent to their personal confu-
sion/concern about heterosexual identity; accepting their identity;
beginning to seek social support from others who share a similar
identity; and finally, embracing their identity to the point that they
are willing to come out [29, 67].
2.2.2 LGBT People’s Self-disclosure on Social Media. Although self-
disclosure is crucial to developing one’s LGBT identity, gaining
support, and building truthful connections with others [ 57], self-
disclosure decisions are shaped by a process of weighing bene-
fits against risks [ 23,54]: for instance, positives such as gaining
emotional and informational support [ 23,54] must be balanced
against negatives including rejection, discrimination, and stigma-
tization [ 23,54,57]. Prior studies have investigated LGBT social-
media users’ strategic self-disclosure [ 23,30,54]. To avoid risks of
disclosing their stigmatizing identities, LGBT users may choose
to keep silent on LGBT-related matters [ 30], modify content that
presents their prior identity [ 33], maintain multiple accounts on the
same platform [ 12], use implicit cues (e.g., sharing LGBT-related
political articles, displaying the rainbow flag in profile photos) to
disclose LGBT identity [ 12], and partition their networks in the
hope of disclosing their stigmatized identity more safely [ 33,54].
Based on such findings, researchers have made design recommen-
dations for people to have more control over the information that
they disclose on social media, such as by controlling the visibility
of individual posts and “likes” [ 8] and improving pseudonymity to
make people feel safer when disclosing stigmatized identities or
experiences [5, 34].
Despite the adoption of some such technological recommenda-
tions, recent studies have shown that SMWs in China still face
various obstacles to the development of their sexual identities and
receipt of social support on social media [ 53,64]. For example,
middle-aged SMWs in China tend to hide their sexuality, keep a
low profile, and express little emotion on social media [64]. These
previous studies inspired us to focus on acquiring a better under-
standing of how members of China’s SMW population develop and
disclose their identities when seeking relationships, friendships,
and support.2.3 Dating Apps for LGBT People
Alongside social media, dating apps serve as an important method
for LGBT people to learn about and build relationships with similar
others [ 29]. In China, LGBT dating apps proliferated after the release
of dating apps aimed at men seeking men, such as redd in 2012 and
ZANK in 2013 [ 71]. Lesbian dating apps including Rela, LesPark,
and LesDo also emerged beginning in 2012 and have gained in
popularity since [ 63]. Although these popular and highly visible
sites/apps may be subject to censorship and regulation, the online
space has developed rapidly as one in which LGBT people can
interact relatively freely, at least as compared to on more public
media and in offline spaces [71].
In contrast to some Western equivalents such as Grindr and
Jack’d, which mainly focus on location-based browsing and swipe
functionality to help users discover and develop relationships with
others in their physical vicinity [ 71], LGBT dating apps in China are
multipurpose platforms that also provide networking and social-
support functionality [ 15,51,64,71]. For example, users of the gay
dating app redd can interact with others through live streaming,
shop online for LGBT products, seek support for having children
via overseas surrogacy, and obtain help with HIV/AIDS preven-
tion [ 71]. On SMW dating apps such as Rela and Butterfly, users
can participate in chat spaces and discussion forums on a wide
range of topics, from SMW-related issues to hobbies and married
life [15, 64].
Regarding the use of dating apps, previous studies have indi-
cated that Western LGBT people use some dating apps not only for
relationship-building [ 7,46], but also for exploring and experiment-
ing with their LGBT identities via interaction with other nearby
LGBT users [ 29]. Likewise, in the Chinese case, Miao et al. [ 51] sug-
gested that redd’s social functions – including talking to other gay
users who lived far away, and becoming integrated into the online
gay community as a live streamer – went well beyond helping users
to find romantic relationships or sexual encounters. Wu et al. [ 75]
found that dating apps’ users engaged in conversations on a variety
of topics to find people with whom they shared common interests
or experiences and whom they felt comfortable with. Similarly,
Tang [ 64] found that SMWs in heterosexual marriages disclosed
their struggles and discontent in discussion forums on a dating
app, as a means of seeking mutual support. Wang [ 70], meanwhile,
found that the audiences for live streaming on gay dating apps
were comfortable with online gifting as a means of obtaining online
homosexual companionship that was not available in their offline,
overtly heterosexual lives.
2.3.1 Challenges of Using LGBT Dating Apps. Although dating
apps may help LGBT people build relationships [ 7,15,75], their
LGBT users appear to be plagued by concerns about privacy be-
cause online dating profiles contain more sensitive information
(e.g., sexual orientation and religion) than profiles on typical social-
media platforms do [ 19], and this information could leak into public
spaces [ 14,43,64]. For example, Lauckner et al. [ 43] identified risks
associated with using dating apps, such as scams, catfishing, and
harassment from strangers. Prior studies [ 24–28] also indicated that
many SMWs use both the popular dating app Tinder and social me-
dia, resulting in infiltration and harassment from outsiders. Duguay
et al. [ 27] reported that catfishing and predatory accounts on theCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Yichao Cui, Naomi Yamashita, Mingjie Liu, and Yi-Chieh Lee
dating app make online dating risky, making SMW users spend sub-
stantial amounts of time scrutinizing profiles. In China, the specific
social and cultural circumstances discussed above would intensify
LGBT dating app users’ concerns about unanticipated disclosures
of their sexuality [ 14,64]. As a result of workplace discrimination
on the basis of sexual orientation, for example, SMW users there
tend to keep a low profile on SMW dating apps [64].
Such privacy concerns make self-disclosure difficult, despite it
being imperative for building relationships. Indeed, previous stud-
ies have shown that stigmatized people are faced with tensions
between self-presentation and self-disclosure when developing re-
lationships online [ 7,14]. For example, Blackwell et al. [ 7] reported
that on Grindr, there was a tension between a wish to boost others’
positive perceptions of oneself by revealing more personal informa-
tion, and a desire to avoid unexpectedly coming out in real life. In
line with Goffman’s [ 31] pre-digital theorizations, dating-app users
are highly motivated to maintain others’ positive impressions of
them in offline contexts, and hope to avoid revealing their poten-
tially stigmatizing identity to their offline social circles. In short,
if app users want to maintain some level of privacy, they will be
at a disadvantage when it comes to meeting others, because many
people are relatively uninterested in potential partners who disclose
little about themselves [7].
2.3.2 Methods of Alleviating Challenges. Some studies have inves-
tigated how dating-app design could be improved to help alleviate
both LGBT and non-LGBT users’ privacy concerns [ 21,49]. For
example, Lopes et al. [ 49] argued that Tinder’s matching mecha-
nism probably enhanced privacy, because a user sees ratings from
another only when they show mutual interest. Das [ 21] recom-
mended adding verification criteria based on evaluation of profiles’
authenticity, and providing users who earn high “trust scores” with
better in-app features.
However, privacy concerns around whether and how to dis-
close stigmatized identities and experiences remain unresolved.
Several studies [ 7,25,41] have explored LGBT daters’ self-disclosure
strategies, with the aim of resolving such concerns. For exam-
ple, Duguay [ 25] found that women carefully balanced their self-
presentation of homosexuality against the preservation of identi-
fiable personal information, at least until their matches were con-
firmed. Blackwell et al. [ 7] indicated that Grindr users adopted
non-facial profile pictures, such as landscapes and blank photos, to
prevent them from being identified by known others whom they
did not want to interact with on Grindr. And Jones [ 41] reported
that gay male users exchanged photos in private online chatrooms
as a way to showcase sincerity while still guarding their privacy.
In China, LGBT dating-app users have tended to be quite rigor-
ous about managing the risks of being recognized offline [ 51,64].
For example, Chinese gay male users have been found to prefer
communicating with other users who are far away from their lo-
cation [ 51]. What’s more, since many gay men have been forced
into marriages with females who might not be aware of their ho-
mosexuality, to avoid being discovered by their wives, they seemed
to carefully hide the LGBT dating app by deleting and re-installing
it every day [51].
In sum, previous studies suggest that dating apps have the po-
tential to facilitate LGBT users’ relationship-building [ 7,46] whilealso posing certain risks to them, such as unexpectedly coming
out [ 7,51] and infiltration by non-LGBT individuals [ 27,28]. These
findings hold true in the Mainland Chinese context [ 64]. Recently,
scholars have focused attention on gay men’s perspectives on the
use of dating apps [ 46,51,70] and how LGBT users in China use
certain features of such apps, such as discussion forums and live
streaming [ 51,64,71]. However, we believe that more exploration
of the relevant issues will be necessary if safer online spaces for the
Chinese LGBT population are to be designed effectively. Thus, the
present work explores how SMWs in China make self-disclosure
decisions and how they build either online or offline relationships
with other SMW users through dating apps.
2.4 Research Questions
As mentioned above, SMWs in China tend to suffer from social
isolation, strong heteronormative family pressures, and related
risks of unintentional disclosure. However, scholarly knowledge of
their practices and concerns around self-disclosure and relationship-
building on dating apps remains scant. Moreover, given that sexu-
ality is culturally constructed and should be interpreted in light of
specific cultural contexts [ 2,44], there is a lack of understanding
of SMWs’ self-disclosure decisions in Chinese contexts. To address
this gap, we conducted an interview study with SMWs living in
China. The interview questions were designed to address three
main research questions, each of which aims to supplement exist-
ing scholarship:
•RQ1: What factors (a) encourage SMWs in China to use
SMW dating apps, and (b) discourage them from using such
apps?
•RQ2: What and how do SMWs in China self-disclose on
SMW dating apps?
•RQ3: How do SMWs in China build relationships using SMW
dating apps?
3 METHODS
3.1 Recruitment
Our study recruited interviewees through snowball sampling. In
prior research, this method has been effectively deployed to recruit
participants from hard-to-reach populations and subgroups [ 30,54].
We initially used a few Chinese keywords to search for potential
interviewees on Weibo, one of China’s most popular social-media
platforms; and based on the results, reached out to some individuals
who had openly disclosed their SMW identities on their Weibo
pages. We then identified several accounts that actively posted
new content, and sent private messages inviting those accounts’
followers to join an audio-only online meeting. In that meeting,
we explained our research goals and how we would protect our
participants’ identities. Then, all of them were invited to interviews
aimed at capturing their experiences. Additionally, we asked this
initial group of potential participants for their help with sharing
our recruitment materials with other possible interviewees within
their online networks. Those materials contained the estimated
length of the interview (40 minutes) and a general introduction
to our research goals and team. To ensure that we could explore
SMW users’ common strategies for, and concerns about, using SMW“So Close, yet So Far”: Exploring Sexual-minority Women’s Relationship-building via Online Dating in China CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
Age 18-23 (n=32), 24-26 (n=11)
Gender Female (n=43)
Sexual Orientation Lesbian (n=24), Bisexual (n=19)
Disclosure StatusConcealed (n=4), Close friends (n=39),
Partial Family Members (n=13)
Motivation of Using
Dating AppsFind new friends (n=32),
Seek romantic relationships (n=27)
Table 1: Demographic data of interviewees
dating apps in general, we did not limit participation to people who
had used certain apps.
Before being interviewed, each participant was required to sign
a consent form and answer a preliminary survey (both in Chinese).
The consent form reminded each participant that she would re-
main anonymous and could refuse to answer any questions. The
interviewer then informed them verbally of their right to suspend
or abandon the interview at any time, and that refusal to answer
particular questions would not incur any penalty. The preliminary
survey questions were aimed at helping us understand our inter-
viewees’ backgrounds. Specifically, the survey inquired about: 1)
self-identification (e.g., gender, sexual orientation); 2) age; 3) occu-
pation; and 4) experience of using SMW dating apps, in terms of
usage frequency, perceived benefits, and privacy/safety/other con-
cerns. Based on the interviewees’ survey responses, the questions
we asked them in the semi-structured interview were modified to
enable us to delve deeper into their experiences.
3.2 Interviewees
Our final pool of participants comprised 43 Chinese SMWs, all of
whom were living in China and willing to participate in the in-
dividual online audio interviews. The semi-structured interviews
explored their motivations, practices, and attitudes connected with
dating apps. Each interview lasted 30-60 minutes (M=35.41, SD=10.07)
and was audio-recorded and transcribed for analysis with the in-
terviewee’s permission. Each participant was given compensation
of US$15. The interviews took place from March to June 2021 and
were conducted in Chinese, the first language of all participants
and three researchers. The study was reviewed and approved by
an Institutional Review Board.
As shown in Table 1, the participants all reported their ages as
between 18 and 26; the median age was 21. Most (n=36) were college
students, but five were in employment, and two, unemployed. All
self-identified as female, 24 as lesbian (56%), and 19 as bisexual
(44%). Here, it should be reiterated that we did not exclude any other
subgroups (e.g., transgender women) from the SMW population
from participation; however, none responded to our recruitment
efforts. Four (9%) of our participants completely concealed their
sexual orientation in all their offline social circles. The other 39
(91%) had disclosed their sexual orientation to their closest friends;
but just one-third of those 39 (n=13) had disclosed it to any family
members. As of the dates of their respective interviews, Rela was
in use or had previously been in use by 95% of the participants
(n=41); 11% (n=5) were using or had used LesPark; and 5% (n=2)
had experience of using LesDo. Their reported aggregate app-useduration varied from two months to five years, and their reported
frequency of usage varied from checking the app several times
per day to once every other week. In terms of motivations, 32
interviewees (74%) stated that they hoped to find friends via the
apps, and 27 (63%), romantic relationships.
3.3 SMW Dating Apps in China
Among the three dating apps used by our interviewees, Rela was
the largest Chinese SMW dating app, with more than 12 million
registered users as of 20213, and LesPark, the second largest4. Al-
though the popularity of the three focal SMW dating apps differed,
their sign-up systems and main features had much in common. One
of the key exceptions was that only Rela provided dedicated chat
spaces in which its users could discuss SMW-related issues. All three
apps incorporated a “Search nearby” feature (Fig. 1), recommenda-
tions of posts from other users, live streaming, and user-controlled
sharing of life moments through the posting of text, still images,
and videos.
Only SMWs who were over 18 years old were allowed to sign
up to the apps, and they were also required to link their accounts
to valid cell-phone numbers or other social-media accounts such
as WeChat or QQ. After the signup procedure was complete, they
had the option to fill in a personal profile with their age, sexual
orientation, T/P/H identity5, job, current location, date of birth,
and relationship status. However, users who chose to leave their
own profiles empty could still use the dating apps to check others’
profiles.
“Search nearby” was one of the most commonly used and ar-
guably the most important feature of all three dating apps. When
users viewed profiles from a list of nearby users, they could choose
whether to open them according to two pieces of information, 1)
their profile photos and 2) GPS-based phone-to-phone distance. If
they were still interested after reading someone’s full profile, they
could “follow” that user and initiate a chat with her. Specifically, on
Rela, users could “wink” at another user to show interest (and those
who receive “winks” can “wink” back). Also, if there are relatively
few nearby users, more distant ones can be added to these lists. On
Rela, a paid subscription to “Premium” allowed users to change
location to meet people in other cities, i.e., to view users in those
cities as though they were there themselves; and set more filters
(e.g., include only profiles with photos). Importantly, Rela users
who did not subscribe to “Premium” could not prevent themselves
appearing in other users’ nearby-user searches. Non-premium users
were also disallowed from using other privacy settings: for example,
anonymously browsing others’ profiles, and secretly “following”
them.
3Rela: https://apps.apple.com/us/app/the-l-formely-rela/id1086944243, LesPark:
https://apps.apple.com/no/app/lespark-lesbian-bi-social-app/id132984336, LesDo:
https://www.techinasia.com/china-lesbian-dating-app-lesdo
4In October, 2021, LesDo announced its shutdown without disclosing a reason.
5“T” comes from the English word “tomboy” and corresponds to the US term “butch”;
“P”, from the Chinese word for wife, “po”, corresponds to “femme”; and “H”, for “half”,
refers to a person who engages in both roles.CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Yichao Cui, Naomi Yamashita, Mingjie Liu, and Yi-Chieh Lee
(a) Nearby-user interface, Rela
 (b) Nearby-moment interface, Rela
Figure 1: User interfaces for the “Search nearby” function on Rela
3.4 Interview Protocol
As noted above, all the interviews were conducted in Chinese. Each
interview began with the researcher introducing herself and engag-
ing in small talk to build trust and facilitate conversations. Then,
she asked questions about the interviewees’ experiences as SMWs
in China: for example, “Have you disclosed your sexual orientation
to family, classmates, friends, or coworkers? If so, to whom?” ,“Do you
have any SMW friends offline? If so, how did you get to know each
other?” , and (only if they felt comfortable sharing their experience)
“Have you ever experienced discrimination against your sexual ori-
entation in your offline social circle?” . They were then asked them
about their use of the dating apps, such as “Why did you start to
use SMW dating apps?” , and how long they had been using them.
Then, they were asked “How do you usually use the dating app(s)?” ,
and“What are the app functions that you spend most time on?” The
interviewer also asked for more details about how they shared in-
formation on their in-app personal profiles; how they interacted
with others on the apps; the difficulties they encountered with the
apps; and concerns that arose from using them.
To help us understand the relationships between the intervie-
wees’ concerns and their disclosure practices, we asked them to
identify their intended and unintended audiences, as well as disclo-
sure strategies aimed at coping with these respective audiences. We
also asked them to share their successes and failures when trying
to build relationships using the dating apps. Specifically, we asked
them to describe the processes whereby they built online and offline
relationships on varied applications. The interviewees who said
they had established relationships successfully were then asked to
share the important factors that contributed to that success; and
those who said they had been unable to build relationships were
asked to identify the issues that had prevented this. Lastly, we askedthe interviewees to share any other experiences they thought were
relevant.
3.5 Ethical and Privacy Considerations
Because the interviews by their nature evoked potentially sensitive
information, such as experience of being discriminated against or
sexually harassed, the interviewees were reminded at the begin-
ning of each interview that they could skip any questions they did
not feel comfortable answering. If they still mentioned traumatic
experiences, at emotionally charged points, we would suggest that
they might like to pause the interview or skip to the next question.
Each participant was assigned with a randomized ID in place of her
name/nickname. The interviewers carefully reviewed each record-
ing right after the interview, and removed any identifiable content
from the data prior to further analysis.
3.6 Data Analysis
Before conducting the interviews, we conducted a quantitative
preliminary survey to help us better understand our participants’
demographic backgrounds and prior experiences of using dating
apps. We analyzed the survey results by calculating the proportions
of interviewees who claimed to belong to certain groups, identities,
and options.
All interview recordings were transcribed, and we used thematic-
analysis procedures to categorize each response according to the
questions’ themes [ 69]. Initially, two researchers identified codes
and themes from the first six interviews, and then iteratively re-
viewed and labeled the responses with emerging codes. If a response
corresponded to multiple codes and themes, it was divided into
multiple parts so that each part could be labeled with a single“So Close, yet So Far”: Exploring Sexual-minority Women’s Relationship-building via Online Dating in China CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
code/theme. Next, using the initial codes, two raters independently
coded all the remaining responses.
The same pair of researchers then compared their coding results,
with the aim of identifying any disagreements, and discussed possi-
ble revisions, including whether it was appropriate to merge certain
codes or to add new ones. When the coding scheme changed, each
rater re-evaluated and re-labeled the responses. This cycle was then
repeated until the coding scheme was deemed satisfactory by both
raters, and inter-rater reliability had reached a reasonable level
(>92%).
3.7 Limitations
Our study has several limitations that should be acknowledged.
First, because of our sample’s demographics, the findings may not
be generalizable to SMWs younger than 18 (despite some of our in-
terviewees noting that they had started using the focal apps below
that age) or older than 26, or in places other than China. Results
from other age groups and other conservative cultures will therefore
be essential to confirming the findings of this study and building
on them, not least when it comes to designing or re-designing
SMW dating apps to be suitable to their users’ various identity-
development needs at different life stages. Second, the individuals
in our sample stated that they are either lesbian or bisexual women,
despite the keywords we used to search for potential interviewees
not excluding any SMW subgroups. This might be due to the fact
that the question in preliminary survey conflated concepts such as
male, female, and transgender, preventing transgender individuals
from being able to properly declare their sexual identity. Future
research should therefore be sure to include transgender women,
who experience even stronger stigmatization and might therefore
deploy more complex self-disclosure practices, although such fu-
ture research would undoubtedly be challenging [ 34,62]. Also, to
allow our interviewees to share their experiences freely while main-
taining their safety, we did not ask them to verify their identities
on the SMW dating apps. This might have affected the interviews’
authenticity, though we hope that our use of the snowball sampling
method mitigate this concern. To further mitigate it, future re-
searchers on this topic should consider collaborating with relevant
LGBT organizations. Lastly, most of our interviewees were famil-
iar with Rela but had little experience of using other dating apps.
Therefore, our study may have overlooked key aspects of SMWs’
usage of other platforms. Nevertheless, we believe our findings
provide useful insights into how non-Western LGBT populations
use dating apps to build online and offline relationships.
4 RESULTS
This section begins by presenting the factors we identified as en-
couraging or discouraging our interviewees’ use of SMW dating
apps (RQ1). It then describes their practices of and attitudes about
disclosure, and their concerns affecting their disclosure decision-
making (RQ2). Finally, it explores how they attempted to build
connections with other SMWs on these apps, and why such at-
tempts succeeded or failed (RQ3).4.1 Factors Encouraging/Discouraging the Use
of Dating Apps (RQ1)
4.1.1 Advantages of Using Dating Apps.
1. Finding Spaces to Disclose and Discuss Sexual Orienta-
tion. Nine interviewees stated that finding online spaces to dis-
close and discuss their sexual orientations was an important factor
motivating them to use SMW-focused dating apps. They mentioned
that disclosing their sexual orientation could help them feel less
stressed about it. S45 stated: “Disclosing my sexual orientation to
other lesbians on the app makes me feel more comfortable. All the
pressure I feel due to being a lesbian goes away when I talk about
lesbian-related stuff with others. ”
All of these nine interviewees noted that, because they concealed
their sexual orientations from their families and friends to avoid
discrimination, felt completely unable to disclose them on general
social-media platforms such as Weibo and Wechat, where they
were followed by people they knew (e.g., S20). These interviewees
further explained that they concealed their sexual orientations – on
social-media platforms as elsewhere – due to indirect discrimination
from parents, classmates, or co-workers. As S12 explained, “Once I
watched a movie with my roommates and there were LGBT characters
in it. They said LGBT people are disgusting and mentally ill. I was
shocked and disappointed. ”
Censorship of LGBT content on social media was another factor
that led to a lack of space for disclosing SMWs’ sexual orientations.
S12 noted a trend toward harsher censorship that was making pop-
ular social-media platforms increasingly unsuitable for disclosing
and discussing SMW identity: “In recent years, more and more LGBT-
related tags, posts and discussions have been banned on Bilibili and
Weibo, so it is hard to find a good online space. ”
2. Seeking Emotional Support. Eight participants (i.e., five of
the same nine as above, and three others) stated that they were
motivated to use dating apps by a wish to obtain emotional sup-
port from other SMWs, to feel that they were not alone, and to
become more accepting of their own sexual orientations. The same
eight participants expected the online dating community to be a
safe, SMW-specific space where they could seek emotional support
from similar others. For example, they hoped to receive positive
feedback on presentations of their T/P/H identities, and to engage
in communication with other SMWs who had similar experiences
and feelings. As S43 noted: “When I first realized that I liked girls, I
started to use the dating app just because I didn’t want to feel lonely.
I wanted to find a community and better identify with myself. ”
3. Developing Social Relationships with Other SMWs. Citing
widespread discrimination, most of our interviewees said that they
had limited social circles. Moreover, due to the small sizes of these
circles, they had limited opportunities to develop relationships
with other SMWs. Among the 35 participants who cited developing
intimate relationships with other SMWs as a major motivation for
using dating apps, most (n=23) indicated that it had been difficult
to develop such relationships in daily life. S16, for instance, said:
“I didn’t know any lesbians at school and hoped to find friends on
the dating app. ” Some of this group (n=7) also mentioned that they
found it difficult to identify people’s sexual orientations in offline
contexts. As S32 put it, “It’s never easy to identify whether a girl isCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Yichao Cui, Naomi Yamashita, Mingjie Liu, and Yi-Chieh Lee
straight or not in real life. You can guess, of course, but you might be
wrong. ”
4.1.2 Disadvantages of Using Dating Apps.
1. Risks that Do Not Match the Expected Benefits. Six inter-
viewees indicated that the risks of using dating apps outweighed
their benefits. That is, when they disclosed enough information
about themselves to appeal to other users, the risks of being outed
became too high. Thus, most of them failed to establish meaningful
relationships on the dating apps. Sometimes, however, even levels
of self-disclosure that were deemed risky had no positive effects,
as S9 explained: “When I started to use the apps, I often posted things
like what I did or how I felt. I disclosed a great deal of information
and even risked outing myself, but I got nothing. ”
The risks of using the “Search nearby” function to build either
intimate relationships or friendships were cited by 40 interviewees,
who said they always worried about being recognized and outed by
heterosexual males or females from their local social circles. Hence,
they tended not to disclose any information that could be linked to
their offline social identities, which made online interaction with
nearby SMWs harder. As S30 put it: “I live in a small town where
everyone knows each other. One day, I posted photos of myself on the
dating app. Next day, my classmate came up to me and said he saw
me as a nearby user on an SMW dating app. I was afraid that he
would tell my parents about this, so I quickly deleted my account. ”
Five interviewees stated that they were worried about being
harassed offline by non-LGBT strangers who were using the apps
through fake accounts. In particular, they had encountered male
strangers who hoped to satisfy their curiosity about SMWs and/or
wanted to have casual sex with them. These interviewees further
expressed a fear that non-LGBT strangers could take advantage of
knowing about their SMW identities to threaten their offline safety.
S15 explained: “They can pretend to be lesbians when talking to me.
I’m sure that many of them would stalk me if they could find me
in real life. They are curious about lesbians, it’s like we’re animals
in a zoo. ” The blame for the problem of fake accounts operated by
non-LGBT people was laid at the door of the apps’ sign-up systems,
which only asked simple questions – e.g., whether they were SMWs
and at least 18 years of age – to validate their users’ SMW identities.
2. Feeling Harassed by Advertisements for Formality Mar-
riages and Surrogacy Services. Nine interviewees mentioned that
they felt harassed by various in-app prompts and advertisements
that they received in connection with formality marriages and sur-
rogacy services. These interviewees said they were opposed to
formality marriage, on the grounds that within such marriages,
traditional household inequality still existed, and in turn negatively
influenced SMWs’ lives. As S10 stated: “Even though the marriage
is fake, lesbians have to take on more responsibilities, such as rais-
ing children. Many gay men even perceive such inequality as nor-
mal. ” They said they felt harassed when seeing the advertisements,
chiefly due to a combination of official and unofficial discrimination
and internalized homophobia. Six interviewees had received such
advertisements from personal accounts, and four, from the apps
themselves. As S40 noted: “I was constantly bombarded with adver-
tisements for formality marriage, consisting of gay men posting photos
of themselves, with introductions and basic standards for their poten-
tial female partners. ” Such phenomena existed on all three datingapps. Though all the apps offered a "Report" button that, in theory,
enabled users to block inappropriate prompts and advertisements,
two interviewees claimed that they reported such advertisements,
yet continued to receive similar ones. As S27 mentioned: “It was
endless. Sometimes I even wondered if the app tried to recommend
more advertisements about formality marriage to me after I reported
some. ” Both these participants eventually stopped using the dating
apps.
Eight of the same nine participants who felt harassed by advertis-
ing matter said they would prefer SMW dating apps not to deliver
formality-marriage and surrogacy information, because these activ-
ities were not legally endorsed by the government, and/or because
they were made uncomfortable by them as expressions of tradi-
tional values: i.e., that women should marry and continue their
family lineages. They also expressed concerns that their personal
information might be shared with third parties offering these ser-
vices. As S13 said: “The app claims that it supports lesbian women,
but it hurts my feelings. I feel insecure because the app can make
profits from selling my information to gay men; it can also sell my
information to companies that run surrogacy programs. ”
4.2 Practices of Self-Disclosure (RQ2)
Despite the various disadvantages noted above, many interviewees
continued using the apps, on the grounds that they felt a profound
need to build social relationships with other SMWs, and believed
that explicitly presenting oneself as SMW was an essential step to
doing so. A sizeable minority (n=17) disclosed personal information
on the SMW dating apps such as T/P/H identity, photos of them-
selves, and thoughts and feelings about being SMW. They indicated
that doing so revealed their serious attitudes toward online dating.
Personal information could also help other SMW users to verify
the authenticity of their profiles, and thus enhance trust. As S24
put it, “Real information can let others know you’re serious [about
online dating], not just fooling around. ”
However, 31 interviewees reported that they withheld anything
that might readily disclose their offline social identities, such as their
real names, phone numbers, home addresses or schools, to maintain
control over the scope of the audience for their sexual orientation.
Without such precautions, they felt that they could not prevent
what they shared on SMW dating apps from being circulated to non-
LGBT people who know them offline. S30 described the unwanted
consequences of being recognized by her coworkers: “I don’t post
anything that can be used to infer my offline identity. I’m afraid that
my non-LGBT colleagues may learn my sexual orientation, and that
my boss will fire me because of it. ” Therefore, on the SMW dating
apps, these interviewees used several strategies for disclosing their
information, which we present below.
1. Posting Non-facial Photos for Expressing Seriousness. Per-
sonal photos play an important role in dating profiles, but sharing
personal photos was thought to be risky by many of our Chinese
SMW dating-app users. Photos that did not show their faces were
used by 15 interviewees, to protect themselves from being identified
by people in offline social circles. Specifically, they covered their
faces with their hands, and took photos from behind. For example,
S40 said: “I post photos that show my full body with hands covering“So Close, yet So Far”: Exploring Sexual-minority Women’s Relationship-building via Online Dating in China CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
my face. I think I’m doing the right thing to protect myself from be-
ing identified by others at school. ” Of the same 15 interviewees, 13
mentioned that, despite not showing their faces, such photos still
helped them to indicate their T/P/H identities via styles of dress
and postures. They also noted that they felt it necessary to post
photos for this purpose even if they had also explicitly stated their
T/P/H identities in their profiles’ text. They believed that posting
photos that matched their identities helped increase their profiles’
authenticity and express their “seriousness”. As S35 mentioned: “I
have stated in my profile that I am a P. But I still post my no-face
photos because I want others to trust me and know that I am serious
about online dating. ”
2. Stating T/P/H Identity for Developing Intimate Relation-
ships. For some SMWs, statements of T/P/H identity were not
deemed necessary: notably, if they only hoped to seek online or
offline platonic friends. However, for those who were interested in
building intimate relationships, it was important to disclose such
identities; and 17 of our interviewees explicitly marked them in
their dating profiles. Disclosing this information was mainly in-
tended to filter out those other SMW dating-app users who had
no interest in developing intimate relationships with someone of a
certain such identity. For example, a P might not be interested in
developing a romantic relationship with another P, as S25 explained:
“Explicitly stating your [T/P/H] identity can let others know if there
are any chances of developing relationships. It’s good to save both
parties’ time at the beginning. ” Another motivation for disclosing
such identities was to avoid misunderstandings with other SMW
users, arising especially from the widespread use of non-face pho-
tos. S43, for instance, reported that she disclosed herself as an H
because she was worried about being seen as a P: “I dress and act in
a feminine way, but it doesn’t mean that I’m a P. I don’t want to be
reached out to by people who perceive me as a P and have no interest
in an H. ”
3. Sharing Thoughts and Feelings without Disclosing Iden-
tifiable Events. The counterpoint to the interviewees’ caution
about disclosing personally identifiable information was a wide-
spread preference for disclosure of thoughts and feelings (n=31).
Some (n=15) said they shared feelings as a means of seeking emo-
tional support from other SMW app users. For example, they shared
feelings of happiness that arose from spending time with their part-
ners, disappointment when witnessing discrimination against LGBT
people, and confusion about planning their future paths in life as
SMWs. As S33 noted, “I often describe how happy I am when spending
time with my girlfriend. I want others to enjoy my happiness too. ”
Expressing emotions seemed easier than disclosing experiences
of specific activities they were involved in, as the former could
be unaccompanied by any contextual information, thus allowing
these app users to feel that their online disclosure was safer. As S34
put it, “I have a large social circle at school and I’m afraid of being
recognized by friends. So I express my thoughts on public [as opposed
to personal] issues about LGBT people . It’s safe since I don’t need to
provide any details about myself. ”
4. Implicitly Disclosing Location for Creating Nearby Con-
nections. As noted earlier, the interviewees tended to withhold
information about their offline identities because such information
Figure 2: A user’s post that implicitly discloses location with
photos
could negatively impact their daily lives. Most (n=35) avoided di-
rectly disclosing their locations, such as places of residence, schools,
and employers, and some turned off their phones’ GPS location
functions (especially because, as noted above, they could not di-
rectly disable Rela’s “Search nearby” function without paying extra
for Premium service). Although our interviewees could not see
nearby users’ profiles after turning off their phones’ GPS, they
could still see others’ posts that were recommended to them by
the system. Concerns about disclosing their locations appeared to
be stronger among those interviewees who were college students,
because they lived in dormitories, making it easier for non-LGBT
people in the same building to identify them if they posted photos
of it. For example, as S41 told us, “Many straight girls in the building
know me personally. I don’t know who might deliberately track me
and learn my secret. ”
However, turning off their phones’ GPS capability did not neces-
sarily mean that they concealed their locations altogether. Indeed,
completely concealing their locations would have meant giving
up on creating social connections with SMWs nearby. Rather than
giving up on their goal of attracting those other users, they came
up with subtle ways to reveal their locations. That is, instead of
using the “Search nearby” function, some interviewees shared cues
such as photos of a corner of a classroom or a lake on their campus,
which implied their geographic location while mitigating the risks
of it being recognized at a glance (Fig. 2). As S17 explained, “I never
tell anyone my school’s location. I only post photos of its scenery. For
example, a tree or a part of the building. ” Such implicit cues helped
them to filter out nearby SMW users who did not belong to a spe-
cific social group, e.g., students at the same school. As S40 indicated,
“I hope to be friends with someone who’s also a college student in this
area. Only those who are studying in my school or nearby schools
would be able to recognize the places in my photos. ”
4.3 Building Relationships (RQ3)
As we have seen, the interviewees took the risk of disclosing aspects
of their identities on dating apps as a means of building relationships
with other SMW users. Dating apps, they said, played a particularly
important role in initiating social connections with other SMWCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Yichao Cui, Naomi Yamashita, Mingjie Liu, and Yi-Chieh Lee
users, despite some flawed information and the risks associated
with using apps. Below, we present some ways that these SMWs
used dating apps to build relationships.
4.3.1 Identifying Other SMWs in Offline Contexts. The intervie-
wees said they used the dating apps not only to meet new people,
but also to identify other SMWs who might already be present
in their daily lives. The several methods used to achieve this are
described in turn below.
1. Using Location Sharing to Check the Sexual Orientations
of People Met Offline. Our interviews established that four inter-
viewees had been able to use SMW dating apps’ location-sharing
functions to identify whether someone else was SMW in an offline
context. They explained that, when they found it hard to guess a
person’s sexual orientation simply by observing her, they would
seek confirmation by checking if she appeared as a nearby user. “In
a subway, I noticed a good-looking girl in front of me. But I wasn’t
sure if she was a lesbian. So I checked dating profiles of nearby users
who were within a hundred meters. Eventually, I found she had a
profile with a photo that only showed half of her face” (S45).
2. Using the “Wink” Feature of the Rela App to Identify if
Someone Met Offline is SMW .Some interviewees also reported
using “wink” feature of the dating app Rela in novel ways to iden-
tify if someone they met offline was SMW. For example, S33 used
winking as a physical gesture to approach other women in offline
contexts: “One day in a bubble-tea shop, I saw a girl who dressed like
a T. To confirm, I winked at her. She immediately got it and winked
back at me. ” S32, on the other hand, hung a keychain featuring
Rela’s “wink” icon on her bag, “to give a little hint and attract more
lesbians to meet me in daily life. ”
4.3.2 Cultivating Relationships on Dating Apps. For SMWs who
decided to cultivate relationships on dating apps, initiating engag-
ing conversations, and transferring those conversations to other
platforms and other modes of interaction, were both important.
Each of those needs is explored below.
1. Initiating Engaging Conversations. Finding commonali-
ties – e.g., hobbies and interests, locations, and social groups –
was deemed key to initiating engaging conversations on the three
dating apps, and 16 interviewees said that they had successfully
initiated such conversations based on other SMWs’ profile informa-
tion. However, a much larger subgroup of our participants (n=28)
reported having trouble finding commonalities due to other app
users’ limited self-disclosures, which were sometimes of nothing
more than their sexual orientations. As S4 noted, “Finding a partner
is not only about finding another lesbian. It’s about finding someone
who has similar interests and values. ”
2. Switching to Other Platforms. Some interviewees (n=18)
switched to other social-media platforms such as WeChat and
Weibo, commonly used for daily communication with offline social
circles, to obtain information about the hobbies and other life cir-
cumstances of women they were interested in. As S21 explained,
“It’s common to see someone with nothing in her dating profile. But
if we have a pleasant conversation, I’ll ask to add her as a friend
on WeChat. Then I can know more about her from her WeChat pro-
file. ” Six interviewees noted that non-dating-specific social-mediaprofiles helped them to verify whether potential partners’ infor-
mation on the dating apps, such as locations and photos, were
accurate/reliable. As S40 commented: “I can’t say that I trust some-
one if I only see one or two photos in her dating profile. She might
have fake photos. If I can see her profile on WeChat, it is possible to
know more. ”
However, not all the interviewees felt comfortable about switch-
ing between platforms in this way. Four indicated that they felt
uncomfortable about, or even ashamed by, developing same-sex
relationships on social-media platforms that were commonly used
in daily life. For them, switching platforms equated to linking other
SMWs to their real worlds, and bringing them closer to their social
circles. These interviewees explained that they were still struggling
with a sense that developing such relationships was incorrect and
immoral. All four reported having low self-esteem due to being
SMW, and that developing intimacy with other SMWs intensified
their guilt. S2 commented: “It’s not okay to add other lesbians on
WeChat. I only talk to them when I secretly use the dating apps. I’ll
say ‘this isn’t right’ to myself when talking to lesbians on the same
app on which I communicate with parents and friends. ”
3. Meeting in Person. At the time of data collection, only six
interviewees had successfully met at least one other SMW app user
face to face. Among the great majority who did not achieve this
goal, most blamed their own strong concerns about being catfished
and outed in offline contexts. They explained that, although they
might find more information about a potential date from other
platforms, they found it difficult to fully trust anyone based solely
on social-media information. As S19 explained, “Within two days
after we became friends on WeChat, she wanted to come to my home.
I didn’t reply to her after that. I felt unsafe because, in the worst case,
she could be my heterosexual classmate. It was impossible to trust her
since I couldn’t verify her identity: I hadn’t seen her photos, nor had I
had a voice call with her. ”
5 DISCUSSION
This study has extended previous work on LGBT dating apps [ 7,
27,28,51,64] by exploring how SMWs in China use such apps
to build relationships with other SMWs while dealing with the
difficult balancing act of guarding their personally identifiable in-
formation but at the same time disclosing their interests, values,
and sexual identities. We have also explored the self-disclosure
and relationship-building strategies Chinese SMWs adopted while
dealing with the cultural factor of families’ and friends’ aggressive
anti-LGBT investigation and intervention. Moreover, we found that
under the prevailing social stigma against SMWs and strict cen-
sorship of LGBT content on popular social-media platforms, SMW
dating apps are used not only for dating: i.e., people use them to
experiment with their SMW identities, share their intimate feelings
as SMWs, and seek SMW friends to discuss SMW-related issues and
exchange emotional support with. Our key findings are discussed
in turn below.
5.1 Concerns about Using SMW Dating Apps in
China
Concerns about Unexpectedly Coming Out. Our interviewees
expressed strong concerns that they would unexpectedly be outed“So Close, yet So Far”: Exploring Sexual-minority Women’s Relationship-building via Online Dating in China CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
in their offline social circles, because this could negatively impact
their lives. Managing their SMW identities and separating them
from their offline social circles was made difficult by infiltrators of
SMW apps, who – whether deemed malicious or merely curious
– were seen as threatening SMW users’ privacy and safety. These
findings resonate with those of previous studies [ 7,23,51,54],
which suggested LGBT users are concerned about being identified
as LGBT to their offline networks. Such concerns seemed to be
intensified for our interviewees, especially those living in the Chi-
nese countryside in which people are likely to know each other. As
explained earlier, China’s LGBT population is likely to be regarded
as a failure and/or source of shame by the other social groups that
they belong to, with many Chinese finding it hard to accept that
anyone in their own social circle self-identifies as LGBT [ 10,72].
This makes the potential negative consequences of disclosure of
minority sexual orientations acute there [18, 53, 58, 64].
Based on our findings, we urge the managers of LGBT-specific
dating apps used in collectivist cultural contexts to pay extra atten-
tion to enhance such apps’ community-boundary management and
community-member vetting practices [ 28,34]. Examples of this
could include asking for credentials (e.g., questions related to SMW
identity, photos, voice messages) when registering, enabling entry
by invite only, and using long-term identifiers [ 34]. It might also
be helpful to make privacy settings more user-friendly [ 21,34,35],
such as by enabling users to set their profiles as visible to other
users only within a certain radius [ 35], or by setting up “trust scores”
by verifying users’ profile authenticity [ 21]. Another implication
of our findings is that such apps should give greater prominence
to “Report” buttons for bad actors [ 27]. This is because in many
current dating apps, such buttons are hidden behind other icons,
which may lead users to think that reporting others is unusual
behavior [27].
Opposition to Formality Marriage. Our findings also indicate
that our interviewees were often discouraged from using SMW
dating apps because they felt harassed by advertisements for for-
mality marriage and surrogacy. This finding has not been discussed
much in prior literature about LGBT online dating in China, since
many of them focused on the process of developing social relation-
ships on LGBT dating apps [ 15,51,64,75]. Although one previous
study [ 71] reported that surrogacy consultation and related ser-
vices were popular on gay-male dating apps in China, our interview
results indicate that SMWs held an opposite attitude toward them.
This apparent discrepancy could have resulted from 1) formality
marriage potentially be deemed more necessary for gay men than
for SMWs, because male adults are generally perceived as responsi-
ble for having male heirs to carry on the family name [ 40,47]; 2)
existing gender inequality in Chinese families leading to exploita-
tion of SMWs labor, e.g., as sole caretakers of children [ 20], to the
point that there seems to be no obvious benefits for SMWs to en-
gage in formality marriage, apart from making their parents happy;
and 3) SMWs’ resistance against being perceived and treated as ob-
jects, to fulfill women’s reproductive duties as specified by China’s
patriarchal traditions [17, 37].
Our same findings further suggest that designers of dating apps
should pay more attention to advertisements, since certain content
may make stigmatized users feel uncomfortable and even triggermemories of their traumatic experiences of living in socially conser-
vative environments. This chimes with prior literature [ 24] pointing
out that activities on social media are not confined to user-to-user
interactions, but also incorporate the practices and influence of
other parties, including advertisers, designers, and marketers. Given
the technical ease with which dating apps can target their users
with information and advertisements specifically designed for the
SMW group [ 71], future designers of such apps and other relevant
practitioners should include ways for their users to avoid seeing
promotional information that they find disturbing or otherwise
unwelcome, even if it is only a very basic reporting/filtering mech-
anism. For example, dating apps could enable users to selectively
view content using content warnings, and/or filter out offensive
content with blocklists [34].
5.2 Implicit Cues in SMW Online-dating Apps
To lower the risks of being directly identified as SMW by straight
people they knew offline, some of our interviewees chose not to dis-
close highly identifiable information such as their faces and exact
locations, echoing prior studies’ findings that gay male dating-
app users often posted pictures without faces due to privacy con-
cerns [ 7,14,35]. While gay male users tended to post pictures
without faces [ 7,14,35], our interviewees reported unique prac-
tices of sharing photos with other implicit cues, such as modes of
dress to indicate T/P/H identity, and photos of locations in place of
their addresses, institutional names. According to the interviewees,
the implicit cues seemed to make their profiles more authentic
and thus more attractive to potential SMW dating partners. Peo-
ple’s self-disclosure decisions are influenced by their perceptions of
potential audiences [ 30,31] and affordances of platforms [ 23,54].
Specifically, Goffman’s impression-management theory [ 31] holds
that every person has a front stage and backstage that align with
their real-life self-presentation practices. People carefully control
what information they share with others, and what information
they share with each of their social circles (i.e., engage in selective
disclosure). Our findings build on this framework by showing how
stigmatized people in China use subtle ways of self-disclosure to
protect their frontstage personalities while meeting their backstage
needs. Most of the SMWs in our study not only engaged in selective
disclosure, but also disclosed information about themselves using
implicit cues – sending secret signals that only those “in the know”
could understand (e.g., implicitly disclosing location, sending “wink”
signals). These findings highlight how such implicit and complex
disclosure serves as targeted impression management. Although
these presentation strategies could not completely eliminate the
risk of being identified as LGBT by unintended audiences, our par-
ticipants still seemed to consider them efficient means of balancing
such risk against the need to convey information essential to using
the apps for their intended purpose.
Implicitly Disclosing T/P/H Identity. Some of our intervie-
wees worried that the cues within such photos that they posted
were either too subtle, or not well-grounded within the SMW com-
munity. They expressed concerns about the lack of reliable common
idiom to implicitly communicate T/P/H identities online. These
findings echo Carrasco et al.’s [ 12] observations that LGBT people
attending a conservative US university strove to “be visible” byCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Yichao Cui, Naomi Yamashita, Mingjie Liu, and Yi-Chieh Lee
“utilizing implicit cues”, e.g., sharing personal photos that carried
indications of their LGBT status on Facebook, and engaged with
other LGBT students by identifying their implicit cues. We found
that many SMWs used non-facial photos to implicitly disclose their
T/P/H identity even when they also presented such orientations on
their SMW dating apps textually, perhaps as a means of enhancing
their dating profiles’ authenticity. As such, our study extends prior
work on social-media users’ strategies for LGBT identity disclosure
in a more general sense, such as displaying the rainbow flag and
presenting same-sex intimacy in profile photos [ 12]. Therefore, dat-
ing apps for SMWs should provide features that assist their users’
development of such a common idiom. For instance, tools could
allow customization of personal profiles in ways that implicitly
disclose T/P/H identity, perhaps through color-coding.
Implicitly Disclosing Location. To establish trust and reach
out to other SMW daters nearby, implicit location cues were also
used by our interviewees. Uploading pictures of their location was
widely deemed to be strong proof of bona fides ; and conversely,
successfully interpreting the similarly cryptic location information
provided by other app users was regarded as sufficient proof of
their own familiarity with certain places.
Given that stigmatized users in conservative nations tend to
be more careful when sharing photos and locations, future app
designs should assist their users to create implicit locational cues
to protect their privacy. For example, instead of asking their users
to directly state their locations in their profiles, dating apps could
allow them to upload photos that implicitly show their locations.
However, image-processing technologies on such platforms could
automatically recognize photo content [ 3] and thus generate further
privacy risks. Therefore, a photo-matching technique for dating
apps could be deployed, to allow users from stigmatized groups to
confirm that the photos they are about to upload do not match any
other images on social-media platforms.
Using Features of Dating Apps as Implicit Cues for Iden-
tifying SMWs Offline. Some of our interviewees also identified
people they met or saw offline as SMW by using their dating apps’
“Search nearby” functions, by physically winking offline in con-
scious mimicry of Rela’s “wink” feature, and in one case, by display-
ing Rela’s “wink” icon on a keychain. This extends prior literature
on LGBT dating apps, which has mainly delineates a trajectory of
starting to build relationships in online contexts and then extend-
ing those relationships to offline ones [ 7,25,41,46]. Our unique
finding suggests that in Chinese contexts, it is possible for users
to use certain dating-app features as a “radar” to identify SMWs
among nearby people, and use unique icons to send secret mes-
sages about their sexual orientations to other SMWs without being
discovered by outsiders. However, because the “Search nearby”
function (which in many cases cannot be turned off) automatically
shares SMWs’ real-time distance from nearby users, and thus might
intensify their privacy concerns, dating apps could improve it by
automatically turning it off when users are in certain places (e.g.,
school dormitories) where they are unlikely to want their SMW
status to be discovered.5.3 Sharing Emotional Content on SMW
Dating Apps
We found that posting highly personal and emotional content, ob-
serving others’ experiences as SMWs, and communicating with
others constituted important practices among our interviewees
when using dating apps to seek emotional support and explore
their SMW identity. These findings suggest that SMW dating apps
in China play a role closely parallel to that of social-media plat-
forms. This idea chimes with prior findings that social media have
the potential to improve LGBT users’ mental well-being by pro-
viding informational support [ 29,50,61], supporting interaction
as they learn how to navigate the social world as an LGBT per-
son [ 29,35,50], helping them gain emotional support [ 4,32,57],
and enabling the construction of supportive community environ-
ments [ 4,29]. Similar to gay-male dating apps in China, which
serve as multipurpose platforms for both networking and social
support [ 51,71], our study shows that SMW dating apps serve
as crucial spaces not only for seeking “hookups” and intimate re-
lationships, but also for facilitating social support and identity
development, including by enhancing their understanding and ac-
ceptance of SMW identity. This might be because in China, there is
a lack of social media platforms on which SMWs can freely disclose
their potentially stigmatizing identity without high risks of being
outed to their offline networks or attracting negative governmental
attention [ 71]. Compared to regular social media platforms, SMW
dating platforms, which are less known among the non-LGBT pop-
ulation [ 71], make it relatively possible for SMWs to separate from
their offline networks and create new networks with similar others.
Because sharing emotional content and receiving emotional sup-
port emerged as so important for the SMW users in our sample,
future app designers could usefully consider emotional content as
a distinct component when recommending posts to other users, to
enable more users receive support from others. For example, apps
could include spaces specifically designed for SMW users’ exchange
of emotional support, and develop privacy settings (e.g., anonymity)
in such spaces. Apps could also deploy algorithms that detect emo-
tionally charged posts and recommend them to others who present
preferences for such content and/or who have recently shared simi-
lar content themselves. Additionally, because SMW users might fear
that sharing emotional content increases the risk of being outed, it
might be helpful if dating apps were able to exclude people within
one’s offline circles from viewing one’s dating-profile content. This
could reasonably be expected to lessen user concerns about being
unexpectedly discovered by people they knew offline [76].
5.4 Obstacles to Building Relationships
According to our interviewees, their limited self-disclosure and in-
ternalized homophobia both constituted obstacles to their relationship-
building efforts. Previous research has suggested that lack of infor-
mation (e.g., photos of themselves) makes building trusting rela-
tionships more challenging for stigmatized users [ 7,41]. Our results
support those previous findings in the case of SMWs in China, by
pointing out that such limited self-disclosure makes it hard to ver-
ify others’ identities, which in turn intensifies privacy concerns.
Furthermore, our finding extends the previous studies by exploring
how homophobia might negatively impact relationship-building of“So Close, yet So Far”: Exploring Sexual-minority Women’s Relationship-building via Online Dating in China CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
SMW users in China. Below, we discuss SMW users’ specific chal-
lenges to building relationships arising from limited self-disclosure
of personal photos, locations, hobbies, and other information.
Assessing Trustworthiness. Due to potential infiltration of dat-
ing apps by non-SMWs, our interviewees expressed concerns about
assessing the trustworthiness of other users based on their profiles.
This echoes previous studies’ findings that Tinder users spent con-
siderable amounts of time assessing the trustworthiness of others’
profiles, due to similar concerns [ 25–28]. Furthermore, our findings
suggest that the SMWs in Chinese contexts examined potential
dates’ posts that described their emotions about and experiences
of being SMW. Such reading, they said, helped them to determine
if these others were genuine, vs. non-LGBT individuals who had
registered on the apps for other purposes, and who might find it dif-
ficult to fake SMW-related experiences, emotions, and thoughts. A
previous study [ 27] regarding strategies reported that SMW dating-
app users sometimes chose to make phone calls to decide whether
a contact was actually female, and/or add her to Facebook to see
more details about her. In our case, on the other hand, despite scru-
tinizing others’ posts being time-consuming for our interviewees,
it was seen as a relatively safe way to identify their trustworthi-
ness without revealing one’s own identifiable information (e.g.,
WeChat IDs, phone numbers), which might trigger risks of being
investigated and intervened against by one’s offline social circles.
Therefore, the designs of future dating apps should encourage their
users to publish posts that could be used by other users to assess
their trustworthiness. Additionally, prior research that focused on
gay men has shown that, to assess a potential dater’s trustwor-
thiness, a common approach is to exchange photos in an online
chatroom [ 41]. While in theory the above strategy might also work
for SMWs in China, our interviewees seemed very cautious about
exchanging any kind of personally identifiable information with
online strangers. This was probably because some level of trust had
to be established before an exchange of photos, phone numbers,
and other social-media accounts could take place.
Not Knowing Commonalities Hampers the Initiation of Con-
versations. Our finding that commonalities of location, interests,
and hobbies helped SMW dating-app users to initiate engaging
conversations and develop deeper relationships echoes those of Wu
et al. [ 75] regarding the importance to gay men in China of hav-
ing interesting conversations that unfold topics including common
hobbies or experiences.
Given that different motivations and goals for Chinese SMWs’
use of dating apps might emerge over time, it was notable that
not all of our interviewees expressed any initial awareness that
disclosing their hobbies and interests might become important to
achieving the core aims of app use. This lack of awareness could
have been connected to the fact that the apps themselves had no
features to support their users’ identification of commonalities,
other than a “Hobbies and interests” section that many of our in-
terviewees left blank in the wake of a higher-level decision not
to reveal any sensitive personal information such as their job ti-
tles, addresses, and dates of birth. Future designs of dating apps
could therefore usefully encourage their users to fill out certain
profile sections, or not, depending on their app-use aims. For ex-
ample, if a user’s goal is to build relationships with other SMWs,the app could encourage her to fill out “Hobbies and interests” on
the grounds that this will likely yield more positive experiences of
initiating conversations. Additionally, since dating-app users’ goals
and needs may change over time, such apps could automatically
send reminders to fill in, update, and/or elaborate their goals/needs
and to edit their profiles accordingly. Alternatively, such apps could
provide real-time guidance on how to talk about shared interests
as chat unfolds [ 55]. Additionally, allowing users to customize the
visibility of their profiles and/or profile sections according to other
users’ profile information or their trust level might make them feel
more comfortable about disclosing personal information [8].
Internalized Homophobia/Biphobia Impedes the Development
of Deeper Relationships. Although our interviewees generally
expressed interest in developing relationships with other SMWs,
some expressed discomfort and even guilt about seeking same-
sex relationships. Many appeared to hold beliefs that developing
sexual relationships with other women was disgraceful behavior,
or a form of “failure” [ 52,58,66] that would be detrimental to
their reputations and future careers. Previous studies [ 18,45] have
suggested that facilitating social support from friends and wider
LGBT communities could help to eliminate internalized homopho-
bia/biphobia. However, our interviewees did not seem to perceive
China’s existing social-media platforms (including LGBT dating
apps and online communities) as offering secure environments for
this. Therefore, an important future research direction will be to
explore how peer and community support for overcoming internal-
ized homophobia/biphobia could be incorporated into LGBT dating
apps in socially conservative nations without compromising their
users’ sense of security and privacy.
6 CONCLUSIONS
This study explored how 43 lesbian and bisexual women in China
disclosed their sexual identities and other sensitive personal in-
formation, sought emotional support, and built relationships with
similar others on three popular dating apps. All the participants re-
ported being highly concerned that the information they disclosed
on these dating apps would be discovered by non-LGBT people
whom they already knew, and negatively impact their offline lives;
therefore, they commonly used strategies of disclosing personal
details only implicitly, e.g., by posting photos of themselves that
did not include their faces, or not their entire faces, and sharing
photos of their surroundings rather than naming where they were.
We further found that SMW dating apps not only motivated their
users to identify one another offline, but also facilitated their iden-
tity development and exchange of emotional support. These key
findings’ implications for future designs of dating app for SMWs
in socially conservative societies were also discussed. In short, our
study provides new understandings of what affects Chinese SMWs’
sense of what personal information is safe to disclose in the online
environment, how it is safe to disclose it, and why.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are thankful for all the anonymous reviewers whose feedback
helped us improve the paper significantly. We also thank the inter-
viewees who contributed their life experiences and thoughts to this
study.CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Yichao Cui, Naomi Yamashita, Mingjie Liu, and Yi-Chieh Lee
REFERENCES
[1]2019. Many LGBT people in China forced into illegal ’conversion therapy’: groups.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-lgbt-health-idUSKBN1XV113
[2]Amy Adamczyk and Yen-hsin Alice Cheng. 2015. Explaining attitudes about
homosexuality in Confucian and non-Confucian nations: Is there a ‘cul-
tural’influence? Social Science Research 51 (2015), 276–289.
[3]Kashif Ahmad, Konstantin Pogorelov, Michael Riegler, Olga Ostroukhova, Pål
Halvorsen, Nicola Conci, and Rozenn Dahyot. 2019. Automatic detection of
passable roads after floods in remote sensed and social media data. Signal
Processing: Image Communication 74 (2019), 110–118.
[4]Nazanin Andalibi and Andrea Forte. 2018. Responding to sensitive disclosures
on social media: A decision-making framework. ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction (TOCHI) 25, 6 (2018), 1–29.
[5]Nazanin Andalibi, Oliver L Haimson, Munmun De Choudhury, and Andrea Forte.
2018. Social support, reciprocity, and anonymity in responses to sexual abuse
disclosures on social media. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction
(TOCHI) 25, 5 (2018), 1–35.
[6]John Balzano. 2007. Toward a Gay-Friendly China: Legal Implications of Tran-
sition for Gays and Lesbians. Law & Sexuality: Rev. Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual &
Transgender Legal Issues 16 (2007), 1.
[7]Courtney Blackwell, Jeremy Birnholtz, and Charles Abbott. 2015. Seeing and
being seen: Co-situation and impression formation using Grindr, a location-aware
gay dating app. New Media & Society 17, 7 (2015), 1117–1136. https://doi.org/10.
1177/1461444814521595 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444814521595
[8]Lindsay Blackwell, Jean Hardy, Tawfiq Ammari, Tiffany Veinot, Cliff Lampe, and
Sarita Schoenebeck. 2016. LGBT parents and social media: Advocacy, privacy,
and disclosure during shifting social movements. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
conference on human factors in computing systems . 610–622.
[9]Francois B Botha, Amanda L Shamblaw, and David JA Dozois. 2017. Reducing
the stigma of depression among Asian students: A social norm approach. Journal
of Cross-Cultural Psychology 48, 1 (2017), 113–131.
[10] Talha Burki. 2017. Health and rights challenges for China’s LGBT community.
The Lancet 389, 10076 (2017), 1286.
[11] Jonathan Capehart. 2019. The internal challenges facing the LGBT move-
ment. https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-partisan/wp/2015/02/09/
the-internal-challenges-facing-the-lgbt-movement/
[12] Matthew Carrasco and Andruid Kerne. 2018. Queer Visibility: Supporting LGBT+
Selective Visibility on Social Media . Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173824
[13] NATIONAL LGBT HEALTH EDUCATION CENTER. 2019. SUP-
PORTING THE HEALTH OF SEXUAL MINORITY WOMEN. https:
//www.lgbtqiahealtheducation.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/TFI-
52_Heath-of-Sexual-Minority-Women-Brief_Final_web.pdf.
[14] Lik Sam Chan. 2016. How sociocultural context matters in self-presentation: A
comparison of US and Chinese profiles on Jack’d, a mobile dating app for men
who have sex with men. International Journal of Communication 10 (2016), 20.
[15] Lik Sam Chan. 2021. The Politics of Dating Apps: Gender, Sexuality, and Emergent
Publics in Urban China . MIT Press.
[16] Susanne YP Choi and Ming Luo. 2016. Performative family: Homosexuality, mar-
riage and intergenerational dynamics in China. The British Journal of Sociology
67, 2 (2016), 260–280.
[17] Jean Chong. 2017. A brief perspective on the LBT movement in China . https:
//outrightinternational.org/content/brief-perspective-lbt-movement-china
[18] Pizza Ka-Yee Chow and Sheung-Tak Cheng. 2010. Shame, internalized heterosex-
ism, lesbian identity, and coming out to others: A comparative study of lesbians
in mainland China and Hong Kong. Journal of counseling psychology 57, 1 (Jan
2010), 92–104. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0017930
[19] Camille Cobb and Tadayoshi Kohno. 2017. How public is my private life? Privacy
in online dating. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide
Web. 1231–1240.
[20] Edmond J Coleman and Wah-Shan Chou. 2013. Tongzhi: Politics of same-sex
eroticism in Chinese societies . Routledge.
[21] Vishnupriya Das. 2019. Designing Queer Connection: An Ethnography of Dating
App Production in Urban India. In Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference
Proceedings , Vol. 2019. Wiley Online Library, 384–397.
[22] Joseph Nicholas DeFilippis. 2016. “What about the rest of us?” An overview of
LGBT poverty issues and a call to action. Journal of Progressive Human Services
27, 3 (2016), 143–174.
[23] Michael A DeVito, Ashley Marie Walker, and Jeremy Birnholtz. 2018. ’Too Gay for
Facebook’ Presenting LGBTQ+ Identity Throughout the Personal Social Media
Ecosystem. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW
(2018), 1–23.
[24] Stefanie Duguay. 2016. “He has a way gayer Facebook than I do”: Investigating
sexual identity disclosure and context collapse on a social networking site. New
media & society 18, 6 (2016), 891–907.
[25] Stefanie Duguay. 2017. Identity modulation in networked publics: Queer women’s
participation and representation on Tinder, Instagram, and Vine . Ph.D. Dissertation.Queensland University of Technology.
[26] Stefanie Duguay. 2019. “There’s no one new around you”: Queer women’s expe-
riences of scarcity in geospatial partner-seeking on Tinder. In The Geographies
of Digital Sexuality . Springer, 93–114.
[27] Stefanie Duguay, Jean Burgess, and Nicolas Suzor. 2020. Queer women’s ex-
periences of patchwork platform governance on Tinder, Instagram, and Vine.
Convergence 26, 2 (2020), 237–252.
[28] Lindsay Ferris and Stefanie Duguay. 2020. Tinder’s lesbian digital imaginary:
Investigating (im) permeable boundaries of sexual identity on a popular dating
app. New Media & Society 22, 3 (2020), 489–506.
[29] Jesse Fox and Rachel Ralston. 2016. Queer identity online: Informal learning
and teaching experiences of LGBTQ individuals on social media. Computers in
Human Behavior 65 (2016), 635–642.
[30] Jesse Fox and Katie M Warber. 2015. Queer identity management and political
self-expression on social networking sites: A co-cultural approach to the spiral
of silence. Journal of Communication 65, 1 (2015), 79–100.
[31] Erving Goffman et al .1978. The presentation of self in everyday life . Vol. 21.
Harmondsworth London.
[32] Oliver L. Haimson, Jed R. Brubaker, Lynn Dombrowski, and Gillian R. Hayes.
2015. Disclosure, Stress, and Support During Gender Transition on Facebook.
InProceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work & Social Computing (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CSCW ’15) . Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1176–1190. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2675133.2675152
[33] Oliver L Haimson, Jed R Brubaker, Lynn Dombrowski, and Gillian R Hayes. 2016.
Digital footprints and changing networks during online identity transitions. In
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .
2895–2907.
[34] Oliver L Haimson, Justin Buss, Zu Weinger, Denny L Starks, Dykee Gorrell,
and Briar Sweetbriar Baron. 2020. Trans Time: Safety, Privacy, and Content
Warnings on a Transgender-Specific Social Media Site. Proceedings of the ACM
on Human-Computer Interaction 4, CSCW2 (2020), 1–27.
[35] Jean Hardy and Silvia Lindtner. 2017. Constructing a desiring user: Discourse,
rurality, and design in location-based social networks. In Proceedings of the 2017
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing .
13–25.
[36] Pamela Heller. 2009. Challenges facing LGBT asylum-seekers: The role of social
work in correcting oppressive immigration processes. Journal of Gay & Lesbian
Social Services 21, 2-3 (2009), 294–308.
[37] Timothy Hildebrandt. 2012. Development and division: The effect of transnational
linkages and local politics on LGBT activism in China. Journal of Contemporary
China 21, 77 (2012), 845–862.
[38] Timothy Hildebrandt. 2019. The one-child policy, elder care, and LGB Chinese:
A social policy explanation for family pressure. Journal of homosexuality 66, 5
(2019), 590–608.
[39] Zheping Huang. [n.d.]. Only 5% of China’s LGBT citizens have come out of the
Closet. https://qz.com/687880/only-5-of-chinas-lgbt-citizens-have-come-out-
of-the-closet/
[40] Quanbao Jiang, Ying Li, and Jesús J Sánchez-Barricarte. 2016. Fertility intention,
son preference, and second childbirth: survey findings from Shaanxi Province of
China. Social Indicators Research 125, 3 (2016), 935–953.
[41] Rodney H Jones. 2005. ‘You show me yours, I’ll show you mine’: The negotiation
of shifts from textual to visual modes in computer-mediated interaction among
gay men. Visual Communication 4, 1 (2005), 69–92.
[42] Chow S Lam, Hector Tsang, Fong Chan, and Patrick W Corrigan. 2006. Chinese
and American perspectives on stigma. Rehabilitation Education 20, 4 (2006),
269–279.
[43] Carolyn Lauckner, Natalia Truszczynski, Danielle Lambert, Varsha Kottamasu,
Saher Meherally, Anne Marie Schipani-McLaughlin, Erica Taylor, and Nathan
Hansen. 2019. “Catfishing,” cyberbullying, and coercion: An exploration of the
risks associated with dating app use among rural sexual minority males. Journal
of Gay & Lesbian Mental Health 23, 3 (2019), 289–306.
[44] Erick Laurent. 2005. Sexuality and human rights: an Asian perspective. Journal
of Homosexuality 48, 3-4 (2005), 163–225.
[45] Ming Li. 2017. Social Networks and Lesbians’ Mental Health: A Study of a Lesbian
Community in Northeast China . The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Hong
Kong).
[46] Christian Licoppe, Carole Anne Rivière, and Julien Morel. 2016. Grindr casual
hook-ups as interactional achievements. New Media & Society 18, 11 (2016),
2540–2558.
[47] Min Liu. 2013. Two gay men seeking two lesbians: An analysis of Xinghun
(formality marriage) ads on China’s Tianya. cn. Sexuality & Culture 17, 3 (2013),
494–511.
[48] Tingting Liu. 2017. LESDO: Emerging digital infrastructures of community-based
care for female queer subjects. Feminist Media Studies 17, 2 (2017), 301–305.
[49] Milena Ribeiro Lopes and Carl Vogel. 2017. Women’s perspective on using Tinder:
A user study of gender dynamics in a mobile device application. In Proceedings
of the 35th ACM International Conference on the Design of Communication . 1–10.“So Close, yet So Far”: Exploring Sexual-minority Women’s Relationship-building via Online Dating in China CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
[50] Leanna Lucero. 2017. Safe spaces in online places: Social media and LGBTQ
youth. Multicultural Education Review 9, 2 (2017), 117–128.
[51] Weishan Miao and Lik Sam Chan. 2021. Domesticating Gay Apps: An Inter-
sectional Analysis of the Use of Blued Among Chinese Gay Men. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication 26, 1 (2021), 38–53.
[52] Toby Miles-Johnson and Yurong Wang. 2018. ‘Hidden identities’: perceptions of
sexual identity in Beijing. The British journal of sociology 69, 2 (2018), 323–351.
[53] Joyce YM Nip. 2004. The relationship between online and offline communities:
The case of the Queer Sisters. Media, Culture & Society 26, 3 (2004), 409–428.
[54] Fayika Farhat Nova, Michael Ann DeVito, Pratyasha Saha, Kazi Shohanur Rashid,
Shashwata Roy Turzo, Sadia Afrin, and Shion Guha. 2021. "Facebook Promotes
More Harassment" Social Media Ecosystem, Skill and Marginalized Hijra Identity
in Bangladesh. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 5, CSCW1
(2021), 1–35.
[55] Kathleen O’Leary, Stephen M Schueller, Jacob O Wobbrock, and Wanda Pratt.
2018. “Suddenly, we got to become therapists for each other” Designing Peer
Support Chats for Mental Health. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–14.
[56] United Nations Development Programme. 2016. Being LGBTI in China: A Na-
tional Survey on Social Attitudes Towards Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity
and Gender Expression.
[57] Julia R. Fernandez. 2021. “Being Yourself” Online: Supporting Authenticity for
LGBTQ+ Social Media Users. In Companion Publication of the 2021 Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . 249–252.
[58] ZhengJia Ren, Catherine Q Howe, and Wei Zhang. 2019. Maintaining “mianzi”
and “lizi”: Understanding the reasons for formality marriages between gay men
and lesbians in China. Transcultural psychiatry 56, 1 (2019), 213–232.
[59] Timothy Rich, Andi Dahmer, and Isabel Eliassen. 2020. Historical Views of
Homosexuality: Asia. In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Politics .
[60] Kenneth Roth. 2015. LGBT: Moving towards equality. Online Article. January 23
(2015), P1.
[61] Koustuv Saha, Sang Chan Kim, Manikanta D Reddy, Albert J Carter, Eva Sharma,
Oliver L Haimson, and Munmun De Choudhury. 2019. The language of LGBTQ+
minority stress experiences on social media. Proceedings of the ACM on human-
computer interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–22.
[62] Morgan Klaus Scheuerman, Stacy M Branham, and Foad Hamidi. 2018. Safe
spaces and safe places: Unpacking technology-mediated experiences of safety
and harm with transgender people. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–27.[63] Timmy Shen. 2020. Top 5 CHINESE LGBT apps in 2017 ·TechNode. https:
//technode.com/2017/10/27/top-5-chinese-lgbt-apps-in-2017/
[64] Denise Tse-Shang Tang. 2017. All I get is an emoji: dating on lesbian mobile
phone app Butterfly. Media, Culture & Society 39, 6 (2017), 816–832.
[65] Jonathan Tcheng. 2017. " Have You Considered Your Parents’ Happiness?": Conver-
sion Therapy Against LGBT People in China . Human Rights Watch.
[66] Harry C Triandis. 2018. Individualism and collectivism . Routledge.
[67] Richard R Troiden. 1988. Homosexual identity development. Journal of adolescent
health care 9, 2 (1988), 105–113.
[68] UNDP USAID. 2014. Being LGBT in Asia. The Thailand Country Report Bangkok.
United Nations Development Programme UNDP Asia-Pacific Regional Centre (2014).
[69] Dennis Wang, Yi-Chieh Lee, and Wai-Tat Fu. 2019. " I Love the Feeling of Being
on Stage, but I Become Greedy" Exploring the Impact of Monetary Incentives on
Live Streamers’ Social Interactions and Streaming Content. Proceedings of the
ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–24.
[70] Shuaishuai Wang. 2020. Live streaming, intimate situations, and the circulation
of same-sex affect: Monetizing affective encounters on Blued. Sexualities 23, 5-6
(2020), 934–950.
[71] Shuaishuai Wang et al .2019. Living with censorship: The political economy and
cultural politics of Chinese gay dating apps . Ph.D. Dissertation. Universiteit van
Amsterdam.
[72] Yuanyuan Wang, Zhishan Hu, Ke Peng, Joanne Rechdan, Yuan Yang, Lijuan Wu,
Ying Xin, Jiahui Lin, Zhizhou Duan, Xuequan Zhu, et al .2020. Mapping out a
spectrum of the Chinese public’s discrimination toward the LGBT community:
results from a national survey. BMC Public Health 20 (2020), 1–10.
[73] Yuanyuan Wang, Zhishan Hu, Ke Peng, Ying Xin, Yuan Yang, Jack Drescher, and
Runsen Chen. 2019. Discrimination against LGBT populations in China. The
Lancet Public Health 4, 9 (2019), e440–e441.
[74] Cai Wilkinson, Paula Gerber, Baden Offord, and Anthony J Langlois. 2017. LGBT
Rights in Southeast Asia: One Step Forward, Two Steps Back? IAFOR Journal of
Asian Studies 3, 1 (2017), 5–17.
[75] Shangwei Wu and Janelle Ward. 2020. Looking for “interesting people”: Chinese
gay men’s exploration of relationship development on dating apps. Mobile Media
& Communication 8, 3 (2020), 342–359.
[76] Naomi Yamashita, Hideaki Kuzuoka, Keiji Hirata, Takashi Kudo, Eiji Aramaki,
and Kazuki Hattori. 2017. Changing moods: How manual tracking by family
caregivers improves caring and family communication. In Proceedings of the 2017
chi conference on human factors in computing systems . 158–169.