Technology in Spiritual Formation: An Exploratory Study 
of Computer Mediated Religious Communications 
Susan P. Wyche, Gillian R. Hayes, Lonni e D. Harvel*, and Rebecca E. Grinter 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
85 Fifth Street NW 
Atlanta Georgia 30308 
 
{spwyche, gillian, beki}@cc.gatech.edu *Georgia Gwinnett College 
1000 University Center Lane 
Lawrenceville, GA 30043 
 
lharvel@ggc.usg.edu 
 
ABSTRACT  
In this paper, we report findings from a study of American 
Christian ministers’ uses of tec hnologies in religious practices.  
We focus on the use of technologies for spiritual purposes as opposed to pragmatic and logistical, but report on all. We present results about the uses of technologi es in three aspects of religious 
work: religious study and reflection,  church services, and pastoral 
care.  We end by examining how the collaborative religious uses 
of technologies cross and bl end work and personal life. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors  
H5.m. [Information interfaces a nd presentation (e.g., HCI)] : 
Miscellaneous. 
General Terms 
Human Factors 
Keywords  
Spirituality, user experience, religious technologies 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In the last decade, we have witnessed computer systems migrating out of the office into other parts of people’s lives.  CSCW and HCI research has followed a number of those paths, exploring the use of technology to coordinate domestic life, for play, and for interaction in public spaces.  Despite this, the collaborative use of technology in religious life remains largely undocumented. 
More than simply adopting softwa re to run the “church business” 
(e.g., accounting functions), religious institutions have also 
adopted technology into spiritual  practice.  Today, ministers 
podcast sermons to distant listeners, share the words to hymns 
using computer-based presentati on tools instead of traditional 
hymnal books, and send requests to pr ay via email.  Yet, despite 
this uptake of technology in service of worship, we know little about how these systems support collaboration between ministers 
and the laity.  We also do not understand the challenges that users face when appropriating technologies for spiritual purposes that were largely designed for office-based work. 
This paper begins to fill this gap in our knowledge by presenting 
findings from an empirical study of how pastors use technologies 
to support their own and their laity’s spiritual formation .  We use 
the term spiritual formation following in the Christian tradition, 
which defines it as an intentiona l process by which individuals 
transform their lives through prayer, study, reflection and discussion with their faith community.  We focus on spiritual formation because it involves a significant amount of communication and collaboration.  Further, pastors play a 
significant role in this proce ss: supporting, coordinating, and 
leading various aspects of spiritual formation. 
We begin by discussing the results  of previous research focused 
on the religious uses of technol ogies.  Next, we describe our 
research that explored how church leaders have adopted 
technologies to coordinate and communicate with their congregations.  We present results  about the uses of technologies 
in three aspects of religious work: religious study and reflection, church services, and pastoral care. We end by examining how the collaborative religious uses of t echnologies cross and blend work 
and personal life. 
2. TECHNOLOGY AND RELIGION 
In this section, we describe prev ious work that has examined the 
role of technology in religious practice.  We also reflect on recent reports that argue that the use of computers, and in particular the 
Internet, for religious purposes, is on the rise in the United States.  
Finally, we argue that the examination of the collaborative aspects of religious practice offer a unique lens through which to consider computer supported cooperative “work”. 
2.1 Studying Religious Uses of Technology 
Religion has been the subject of much scholarly study, particularly within the historical, sociological, and anthropological traditions.  Within the scope of this paper, it is impossible to summarize the entirety of that discourse, but it has provided useful framings for this work. An early question for us was how to orient to the topic at hand.  Scholars have taken a variety of  positions towards the study of 
religion; ultimately we decided to follow a neutral stance (often attributed to Durkheim [8]).  Specifically, it shifts focus from belief to practice by deemphasizing questions of whether religious 
beliefs are true, false, or within the scope of the teachings, and instead opening up questions about how religious groups are 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
CSCW'06, Nove mber 4–8, 2006,  Banff,  Albe rta, Canada.  
Copyright 2006 ACM 1- 59593-249-6/06/0011 ...$5.00. 
199socially organized and serve as communities of practice for their 
members [12,27]. We followed this approach and focused on the role of technology in religious practice.  Our focus on the social organization—specifically, its collaborative asp ects—that supports and sustains 
spiritual formation afforded us  the opportunity to understand how 
technology enhances the proce sses through which people attain 
spiritual self-awareness.  It al so supported the identification of 
sources of tension in the adopti on and use of technology within 
those same practices. Scholars have also documented religious institutions’ critical examination of technologies [6]. For example, the printing press changed book production by increasing both the volume and manufacturing speed, and resulted in Bibles being widely available.  This availability, as  well as who controlled the means 
of production, caused some religi ous institutions to examine the 
relationship of this technology to their religious practices [29,33]. 
In the last century, Christian ins titutions and individuals have also 
examined “modern” technologies such as the telephone (see for 
example, [10]).  More recently, critiques have focused on televangelism: the use of televi sion to support religious practice 
(particularly worship).  In particular, some have been concerned that the television distances its viewers from the message, and consequently argue that it disrupts the spiritual formation process  [35].  The argument turns, in some part, on the idea that technology separates the indivi dual from religious practice by 
mediating it in non-spiritual ways. Despite these concerns, religious  institutions have often been 
innovators, adopting new technologies to support religious practices (see for example religi ous TV and radio broadcasting 
[5]).  Today, the theological community experiments with Internet-based technologies.  Much of the work to date has focused on distance learning (see for example [1,9,13,18,21,45]).  Theologians, especially those teaching at seminaries, have reported results from distance lear ning experiments that leveraged 
the World Wide Web, email and chat room technologies.  One common feature of these studies is the focus on teaching future ministers, and has an emphasis on skills for leading theological 
and spiritual formation discussi ons.  By contrast, this study 
focuses on the use of technology by ministers to communicate with (and to teach) their laity. Online religious communities have been another focus for scholars [4,6,7,26,28].  Studies in this genre have focused on exploring religious practice with in online community settings.  
One common finding within this tr adition is that of leveling—that 
the organizational hierarchy is fl attened online raising questions 
about control [22]—an argument th at has been made about other 
electronic technologies in the office setting [38].  However, this leveling effect is not always desi rable, particularly when it comes 
into direct conflict with practices that turn on a hierarchy of authority in order to have meaning [7].  In this line of research, 
we also found one example of a device designed to promote the spirituality of online worship [19], perhaps in response to the perceived spiritual leveling of the online worship experience. An interesting “gap” remains in our knowledge of the religious uses of technology.  Specifically, how have people incorporated networked technologies into the physical real-world religious practices (although see Bell’s [3] work regarding technology use in religious practice in Asia).  Th is study begins to fill the gap in 
our knowledge by describing the ro le of technology in religious 
practice in American Protestant Christian churches. 2.2 Why Now? 
This gap in our understanding of technology-based religious 
practice is particularly surprising in the context of the United States.  It is widely recognized that the U.S.—unlike many European countries—has a high percentage of its population actively practicing a religion [12] as well as a high degree of technology ownership.  Indeed , the Pew Foundation’s Internet 
and American Life Project found that 64% of the nation’s 128 million Internet users have used the network for religious purposes [20].  This includes activities such as receiving and sharing email with spiritual content, searching for places to attend services, made or responded to a prayer request online and so forth.  The report offers a comparison by commenting that more people have gotten religious or sp iritual information online than 
have used Web auction sites, trad ed stocks online, or done online 
banking [20].  
Furthermore, in their earlier report, they contacted 1,300 congregations to survey the use of  technologies by those churches 
[32].  Even in 2000, their findings suggest that email was integrated into congregational life, including exchanging messages with ministers.  Mini sters themselves were also 
searching the Web for a variety of material for incorporation into services and answers on matters of doctrine.  Finally, many of the 
churches in the survey had also created Websites.  These Websites served at least two audiences: new members and the current congregation. This integration of technology into physical religious practice has been observed in studies of other systems.  For example, Bruce’s [5] studies of televangelism estimated that the most popular shows had an average audience of about 8 million, and that in a typical month at least 34 million different households watched at 
least one show.  Others argue, how ever, that these watchers were 
also typically regular “church-goers”; they physically attended church services and used televi sion to complement their other 
religious practices [17]. Another new trend in worship also  makes the study of religious 
use of technology relevant: the rise of the megachurch.   Although large churches have existed for centuries, recently they have exhibited significant growth.  These new megachurches have large congregations, new buildings (often including sports complexes, daycare facilities) which are built for technology from the ground-up [12,40,41].  Megachurches have aggressively adopted a variety of technologies  to communicate and coordinate 
religious practice.  Some megac hurches use this technology to 
create an experience designed to resemble a more corporate “look and feel” which may appeal to parishioners who find the traditional imagery of churches such as stained glass and the cross uncomfortable [39].  During this study, we attended services in some megachurches and were able  to witness first-hand the uses 
of technology, which we describe in  this paper.  Of course, not 
everyone finds megachurches’ uses of technology appropriate [36]. In part because of their size, the leaders of megachurches have drawn on corporate mechanisms fo r managing their congregations 
[39-41].  One widely cited reason for megachurches to manage their congregations is to ensure th at each member of the laity feels 
personally connected to the church and a pastor.  We wondered whether and how megachurches used technology for these purposes, and whether it was similar to corporate adoption practices [38,44].  Also, we wondered whether these practices manifested themselves in traditional churches. 
200In summary, while debates conti nue about the rights and wrongs 
of using technology in religious practice, questions remain about 
the actual experience .  In particular, how do those charged with 
delivering spiritual formation—m inisters—use technology?  What 
do they find challenging, and how do they try to support and enhance the spiritual formation of their congregation while avoiding the potential distancing problems of technology?  This study contributes empirical data  to the discussion surrounding the 
uses of networked technologies in  spiritual formation.  Beyond 
that, understanding religious practice provides a reflexive tool for thinking critically about collaborati on.  While spiritual formation 
is collaborative, it has different “goals” from the secular home and workplace coordination traditionally studied within CSCW.  We offer this study as a new pe rspective on the uses of familiar 
technologies such as email, th e WWW, and PowerPoint.  Finally, 
we seek to discuss religious pr actice as a component of the full 
range of human interaction, despite the sensitive questions that this topic potentially raises fo r readers—and authors—of this 
paper.   Our goal is to begin the process of making religious 
technology a part of the discourse within CSCW. 
3. METHODS AND PARTICIPANTS 
In this section, we describe  our methodological approach and 
characterize the churches that our participants represented. 
3.1 Methods 
Given our interest in the role of technology in the spiritual 
formation of the laity and yet not understanding precisely how this topic ought to be approached, we decided to begin with a qualitative interview study of mini sters.  Ministers have the 
responsibility for growing and nurturing the spirituality of their laity, and consequently, we believed that they would be most able 
to help us learn about the role of technology in that process.  Specifically, senior pastors respons ible for the spiritual formation 
of their laity are often key decision makers in the adoption and use of technologies for religious purposes.  Thus, this study was 
focused on exploring how pastors use technology for pastoral care 
and spiritual support both within their congregations and when interacting with people from outside the congregations to gain insights into designing interactive systems for spiritual and religious purposes. 
The study consisted of two data-analysis cycles, in which the data 
collection consisted of interviews  [23].  First, we conducted a 
series of semi-structured broad t opic interviews to get a sense for 
how church leaders were using technology and to help the researchers become familiar with the terminology used in churches.  Learning how to ask appropriately phrased questions 
was critical in developing sufficient rapport with the interviewees such that they trusted us to respect their feelings about technology and spirituality.  At the end of the first cycle, we analyzed the data for promising areas of i nquiry and revised our interview 
guide to reflect these areas.  Additionally, we also rephrased some of our questions to reflect more accurately the terminology that characterized the process of spiritual formation. 
At the end of the first cycle, we also sampled the World Wide 
Web for churches that would form the main part of the study.  Specifically, we approached churches with Websites that included a pastor’s e-mail address and c ontacted that individual.  The 
initial e-mail was followed up by a phone call or fax.  Out of the approximately 10,000 churches in the metro-Atlanta area, 84 were selected and contacted, 13 pastors agreed to be interviewed, 11 
declined, and others failed to respond. 
Interviews, in both the first and second cycles, lasted 
approximately an hour and took place in the pastor’s office.  Our interviews began with questions a bout the participant’s work, as a 
means of setting the context for the remainder of the interview.  Additionally, we wanted to begin with a question that communicated to pastors that we were interested in and wanted to learn from their experiences. The majority of the interview focused on the role of technologies in the spiritual aspects of their job, such as the use of technol ogies in sermons and computer-
mediated prayer.  We deliberately used the word technology—rather than computer—to broaden the scope of the study and to understand further what ministers woul d include in that definition.  
The interviews concluded with a speculative design exercise, asking pastors to imagine technologi es they needed or that could 
be designed for their churches. 
We complemented the interviews w ith visits to the Atlanta metro-
area’s largest and most technologically advanced megachurches.  We attended services, and took notes—after the service was 
completed—about the religious uses  of technology we observed.  
Additionally, we also tried to capture information about the parishioners’ behavior, and th e overall worship experience.  
These notes served three purposes.  They helped us to refine our 
ideas about technology in religious  practice, suggesting directions 
for questions in the interviews.  They also helped us to understand 
what it might be like to be the audience of those technological-religious practices.  Finally, the experience of attending church helped ground us in the very religi ous practices meant to serve as 
the basis for the interviews. 
In addition to interviews and obs ervation, we supplemented this 
data with other occasions to consider religion.  For example, we watched religious programming on te levision.  We also visited 
Christian bookstores to see what types of materials they had—particularly those that spoke to  the presence of technology in 
Christian life such as software  and DVD’s. These opportunistic 
activities also served to ground us in technology in religious life. 
3.2 Participants 
Having decided to focus on pastors,  we also decided to focus on 
Christian Protestant denominations .  We chose this sub-group for 
three reasons.  First, Protestant Christians are predominant in the 
metropolitan area of this study.  This increased our likelihood of 
finding people who would be willing to talk to us about the role that technology plays in religious life. 
Second, we believed that this cl uster provided important balance 
between commonality and diversity.  On the one hand, each church and congregation differed in composition and spiritual needs, despite similar religious  foundations.  Consequently, we 
were able to explore a variety of  viewpoints.  At the same time, 
the common ancestry that these de nominations share provided us 
with some similarity among the religious practices on which we 
focused in this study.  We wanted to gather diverse material about 
practices while having a grounded means to compare across the interviews and observations we conducted. 
Third, some members of the research team had in depth 
knowledge of Protestant Chris tian practices.  These team 
members played an invaluable role in explaining the practices that we were seeing in the services and hearing about from the pastors 
201interviewed.  Their knowledge and connections also provided 
increased entrée into these comm unities.  Of course, the other 
team members whose religious  backgrounds either came from 
other traditions or who were agnostic provided an important 
questioning role. Their questions not only helped us to examine 
the practices closely, but also surfaced assumptions on which those practices are based. 
We were fortunate to have a va riety of perspectives through the 
composition of the team itself.  It was noticeable to us all during the course of doing this work that our own religious biographies became a necessary part of working together.  That we had religious-biographic discussions in our workplace was one unusual but necessary feature of conducting this research.  We were all reminded of the distinction between what typically is discussed at work, and what is not. 
We asked the thirteen pastors interviewed in the main part of the 
study to tell us how many people belonged to the church.  Two of the churches reported having less than 1,000 parishioners.  Five 
churches had between 1,000 and 2,999 members.  Six churches 
reported having congregations of  more 3,000, with one having 
5,000 members.  Although megachurches are often characterized as being much larger than any of the churches in our study, others have offered 2,000 members as an approximate size [39,40].  
Further, we used observations of  Atlanta’s biggest churches to 
confirm that some of the pattern s, and particularly technology 
uses, we saw and heard about in our  interviews, were very similar 
to religious uses of t echnology in megachurches. 
Our participants came from Protestant Christian churches 
associated with the Southern Ba ptist Church, United Church of 
Christ, Episcopal Church, United Methodist Church, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, and Presbyterian Church.  In addition to ranging in size, they also varied along other dimensions.  Of the thirteen c hurches, eleven had predominantly 
Caucasian members, while the other two had predominantly African-American parishioners.  Although we had hoped for more 
African-American church participation in this study, we were glad to have some reflection of the demographic profile of the metro-
Atlanta area. The participant chur ches varied along sub-urban and 
urban dimensions too.  We char acterized the difference by using 
the Atlanta city boundaries (like many large cities in the United States, much of metro-Atlanta is  not politically in the City of 
Atlanta).  We interviewed minist ers at six urban churches and 
seven suburban churches. 
In one dimension, the included churches did not vary—they all 
used a variety of technologies to support a range of different religious activities.  Because we wanted to examine technology uses, we used the World-Wide Web to sample for potential participants.  Consequently, we suspect that those ministers who participated in interviews are mo re enthusiastic about technology 
than a randomly chosen group of churches, because they all had Websites.  Indeed, given the nature  of our research question, we 
wanted ministers and church gr oups who were actively exploring 
technology.  Additionally, given the costs of technology (and connectivity) we also assume that we have a sample skewed towards wealthier congregations that would have provided the 
financing for the installation, ma intenance, and upgrading of these 
technological systems. 
We describe the religious uses in more detail in the next section.  
However, to set the context fo r that discussion we briefly enumerate some of the practices  we saw and heard about during 
our interviews.  All of the churches used the World Wide Web to attract new members and to communicate to the congregation about upcoming services and events.  Many offered a downloadable newsletter, in add ition to offering the newsletter 
physically.  Some provided email access to the clergy, so that laity as well as outsiders (including members of the research team on this project) could contact mini sters.  Some churches produced 
audio and video versions of th e sermons, and following the most 
recent technology trends, a few churches had official blogs and podcasted a variety of media, including sermons.  At the church, we saw projected materials (rath er than spoken only sermons).  
Sometimes this projection left th e sanctuary (the area within the 
church where services are held), in the form of a closed-televised broadcast to satellite locations or a webcast audio and/or video stream.  
It is evident from our interv iews, observations, and existing 
survey data that technology ha s made significant advances in 
integration into spiritual practices  in the United States. With this 
work, we present a basis for continued research in understanding how these technologies affect th e experience of users and their 
interactions with their faith communities. 
4. RESULTS 
In this section, we present our results organized into three topic 
areas.  First, we describe the common work functions of the pastors we interviewed: educati on, preaching and pastoral care.  
We also describe how they have incorporated technology into their work researching and prepar ing sermons, as well as working 
on their own spiritual formation. 
In the following two sections, we describe two types of 
communication and collaboration re ported by the pastors.  We 
then examine the impact  of technology on that work.  First, we 
examine the role of technology, particularly presentation and 
projection systems, on the preaching activity.  While projection systems are relatively common in churches, pastors in this study told us that those technologies we re a source of tension.  This 
tension turns on an emerging divide  among the laity as to the role 
of technology in homiletics. 
We discuss the role of email in pa storal care in section 4.3.  The 
increased ubiquity of email has a llowed pastors and parishioners 
to have greater contact with each other.  However, it is this increased connectivity that seems to be blurring the temporal and geographic lines that once separated religious activities from workplace and other contexts.  This blurring raises questions about appropriate (formal or social) uses of office communications systems for religious pursuits. 
4.1 Pastoral Work and Technology 
In our interviews, we began by asking about the types of work 
that pastors do to understand how  technology might influence 
their activities.  Most pastors responded with a potentially unsurprising list of duties including educating the laity through mechanisms such as Bible study groups, preaching which largely focused on the Sunday service communications, and pastoral care of the laity such as visiting sick  parishioners or counseling those 
in spiritual or personal crisis.  Participants reported uses of 
technology in all of these roles. Away from these spiritually focused activities, most pastors described a variety of administrative duties.  Interestingly, in this 
202context, some pastors chose to draw on office-based metaphors.  
For example, one pastor noted: 
“Senior pastor is comparable to being a CEO of a company, you are the chief operating officer… in terms of everything that happens, in terms of executive…” -- Pastor, large church . 
Some pastors managed several staff members directly, and some 
even managed their own Informa tion Technology staff.  These 
staff members tended to be res ponsible for ensuring that the 
churches’ Web, email, and other technologies were all 
operational.  This type of corporate orientation to church management seems particularly to be associated with mega-
churches, where as The Economis t [39] notes, some ministers 
have even taken to calling themse lves “PastorPreneurs” and using 
CEO and COO titles.  For the study of religious technologies, this 
presence of corporate terms to describe the business of serving religious customers, suggests th at in some cases, the design, 
adoption and use of systems in churches will have a complex grounding in business and spiritual backgrounds.  In this study, 
the presence of both required a conscious focus to understand in what ways each type of orientation was being used to articulate the role of technology in religious practice. During the interviews, we also asked them to describe their relationship with technology (which  we did by asking them about 
the technologies they owned and used as well as asking more 
broadly about how they felt about the presence of systems in their work lives).  We deliberately used  the term technology rather than 
computer or software to leave the answers open to hearing about anything that the pastors thought was technology.  Unsurprisingly, they varied in their personal uses of technologies and how comfortable they felt with  technology in general.  Some 
pastors reported feeling at ease with technology, and owned and 
used PDA’s or mobile phones where they kept contact information about their laity and st aff.  One minister even used 
his mobile phone to manage cont acts for more critical pastoral 
care.  Specifically, he filled his address book with the names and numbers of people who he believed needed contact regularly or frequently because of their circumstances. Some of the pastors also descri bed using Bible software (CD’s 
that contain multiple versions of the Bible and other religious documents), and the World Wide  Web as research tools for 
writing sermons.  This research was widely reported by the participants as a positive use of  technology, giving pastors the 
ability to draw on previously una vailable sources (for them) in 
composing their sermons.  For example, both specialized software packages and the Web generally allow ministers to access a much greater range of Bible editions than they typically own in book form.  Pastors we interviewe d mentioned drawing on this 
information to craft their sermons , to present a broader range of 
materials, to argue points in more  detail, and to set contexts for 
their services. Although all the pastors reported enjoying using the Web and software for their research, they differed widely when asked whether they would use these same online resources for private Bible study and reflection.  While  some mentioned reading online 
comfortably, others preferred to read from their physical Bibles.  For some this was not just a matter of simply finding it hard to read onscreen, but also more a matter of the overall experience of private reflection.  According to  these individuals, the computer, 
even a laptop, did not fit into the spiritual experience of Bible reading and reflection.  As one pastor put it: “Sitting here like this, or even sitting on my laptop at 
home, or against the wall, is a very different experience than sitting curled up on the couch with my Bible and my prayer book or sitting in the chapel with my Bible or my prayer book.”  -- Pastor, small church. 
These pastors all had a heightened sense and ability to articulate questions of appropriateness in use when it came to the 
relationship between reverence for the situation at hand and the use of technology in that context.  Their ability to articulate and frame questions of spiritual use is one reason why we believe the study of religious technology to be important.  Pastors—and all 
those who consciously make tim e for spiritual formation and 
reflection in their lives—provide  another lens for understanding 
how technology gets adopted and used. 
4.2 Preaching and Presentation 
In both their educational and preaching roles, pastors referred to 
the need to communicate.  This type of communication was dominantly one-to-many, with the pastor leading a conversation with an audience (of varying sizes according to the activity).  This ratio was especially true of the preaching role, a role that was mentioned much more than their educational missions.  The most 
commonly discussed technology used in this mode was some type 
of slide generation system such  as Microsoft PowerPoint™. 
However, there are some limitations to using slide systems designed for the office in sermons, and consequently a market for 
religiously orientated presentati on software has emerged.  Titles 
include Prologue Sunday Plus, S ongShow Plus, and MediaShout.  
When we asked pastors about why they used these more specifically designed products, they all responded similarly: 
“There are special things about it because they recognize that in churches that we need to switch often quickly between a video, the sermon notes, possibly a video camera that is going on, Medi a Shout enables you to see 
and then click to process what goes onto the projector.”  -- Pastor, large church. 
In our observations and interviews, we saw and heard about the use of music, video and images, in addition to text in sermons.  In 
other words, during our observa tions we saw images of both 
historic Biblical iconography  and modern photography ( e.g. 
picture of the modern view of an  historical site), we watched 
video footage, and of course hear d music to set further context as 
well as accompany singing where appropriate. Although multi-media services are not impossible with PowerPoint™, it was the degree of control and manipulation 
provided by these other packages that appealed to pastors. The ability to project content on public displays while reserving a private screen for other types of  manipulation and control is a 
central feature in religiously desi gned presentation systems.  It is 
also a new feature in many office-presentation packages such as PowerPoint™ and Keynote™. Memb ers of the church staff or 
laity often controlled the presen tations themselves using these 
tools.  The pastors, although not the people in physical control of 
the presentation, emphasized this feature as being central to allowing them to manage the se rmon, to make it engaging and 
vivid to their laity. The churches in this study requi red projection, audio-visual, and 
lighting systems to accompany their multi-media services.  Our observations, although limited, suggest ed some differences in the 
installation and use of these systems across the churches we 
203visited.  In particular, the size and age of the church building 
seemed to influence how easily and what types of technology 
could be incorporated into the sanctuary. The largest and newest churches in the study (including all the megachurches) uniformly had comprehensive audio-visual, projection and lighting systems throughout the church.  The sanctuary typically contained large public screens around the walls to allow all of the attendees to see the sermon as projection.  
These churches often also had televisions that broadcast the 
service into the church foyer and other smaller rooms.  These simulcasts allowed people, who could not be seated in the sanctuary because it was full, to “participate” in the service.  In one case, a megachurch also broadcasts the pastor’s service to another location several miles away, a satellite “campus” of this particular megachurch. During the services we attended at these new megachurches, we were amazed by the production of the sermon itself.  The sanctuaries typically do not have wooden pews (an image of a church experience that many members of the research team found more familiar), but had cinema styl e seats.  During a service, the 
projected images vary from sermon content, the words to hymns, and even the pastor him or herself.  Additionally, we observed the subtle but powerful use of lighti ng to coordinate the passage of 
the service.  For example, duri ng periods of singing we saw the 
lights rise to full bright levels.  During times of prayer and reflection, someone (we are not sure whether it was the minister or some dedicated staff) dimmed the lighting to suggest time for 
silence and reflection.  In additi on to the direct communication of 
materials through the presentation and projection, lighting systems coordinated the flow and movement of each service, sending the audience, including the research team, messages about behavior, and appropria te action and interaction. 
Like these new large churches, most of the smaller and older churches we observed also re ly on projection systems and 
presentation software.  Unlike the larger churches, their sanctuaries do not accommodate the projection systems nearly as seamlessly.  For example, we saw cases where projection screens obscured other types of religious technologies such as candleholders and even the alter.  Given the “difficulty” of making these technologies fit together in the space, we wondered why the leaders of these churches would go to such lengths to provide this type of experience even when it meant reconfiguring 
the sacred place of the sanctuary. When we explored this issue further, the leaders of these smaller and older churches responded that they feel the need to provide these types of services, that these services have become an expected part of worship for some  members of the congregation.  
At the same time, these leaders also face a challenge to balance the divergent service needs of th eir congregations between those 
who preferred a technology-free service (often termed “traditional” by pastors we inte rviewed) and those who wanted 
the technology-rich service (often termed “contemporary”). As pastors in these churches desc ribed, this typically led to the 
following solution: 
“We have two different se rvices, and yes we use 
PowerPoint™ in the contemporary service and we have music on the screen, we use digitals and cameras and the whole business, and then in the traditional service we use microphones.”  -- Pastor, mid-size church.  
Or “In terms of computers and gra phics, visuals, that sort of 
thing, you won’t find any of that in our traditional service, but in our contemporary servi ce we have screens, words 
for the songs are projected on the screen during the ceremonies, there are visuals that are projected that illustrate or support what is being said.” -- Pastor, smaller church. 
These pastors reported a perceived demand among their congregation for technologically enhanced services; one that they often associated with the younger members of the laity.  Frequently, the pastors interprete d their response to this demand 
as a need to be “relevant” to their congregation. 
“I think that church 2005 can lose relevancy by expecting people to do things the way they did them in 1860, so if we are going to bridge the gap to reach 2005, then we have got to look at ways to be relevant, and so that is a big thing that we are always kicking around here, at the church, in my leaders meeting, in my staff meeting, ‘is that relevant, how do we connect that to the community?” -- Pastor, smaller church. 
But this relevance also raised concerns, at least for some.  For example, as one pastor put it: 
“This is my struggle always, there is a fine line that I want to walk between being releva nt and being reverent… what 
I mean by that is I think being relevant is embracing 
technology, and using it, but ther e is also the reverent side 
of the word of God” -- Pastor, smaller church 
For other pastors, the need to be  relevant was combined with a 
sense that the introduction of thes e technologies allowed a greater 
range of dynamic visual aids.  These aids go beyond those traditionally associated with services such as flowers, wall decorations, and the pastor dresse d in official robes and were 
sometimes more dynamic and sometimes more specifically relevant to the story being told ( e.g. images of holy places as they 
are today).  These pastors noted that technology gave their services greater impact: 
“People are very visual, what people see is very powerful… its one thing to h ear, but to see and then the 
combination of seeing and hearing is very effective in terms of helping, making th ings get to the long-term 
memory, in terms of helpi ng people connect and have a 
better understanding.” -- Pastor, smaller church . 
Interestingly this hypothesis has some correlation to the 
educational literature, which also  suggests that visual aids 
reinforce concepts (see for example,  [25]).  For several pastors, 
these visual aids included refere nces to popular culture, another 
mechanism by which to be “relevant”. Other church leaders reported a belief that these secular references and visual aids can be a distraction that may distance congregants from the church’s Biblical underpinnings. 
“You know because there are certainly negatives to it, because it draws you away from contemplation, it can be an incredible distraction. There is less time sometimes for solitude.” -- Pastor, smaller church. 
One final consequence of the arrival of PowerPoint™ in projected services was the departure of another traditional service technology, the hymnal.  
204“…instead of using hymnals the words are broadcast on 
the screen. That was a real source of tension for a few people for awhile, you know the purists wanted the hymnal.” -- Pastor, mid-size church. 
Although we heard from some pastors that some of the laity felt uncomfortable with the loss of the hymnal, several pastors described the advantage of putting the words on the screen, which turned on flexibility.  For example, 
“It gives you flexibility to alter the text of songs. Say you are using an older hymn and you don’t like the fact that it uses Elizabethan English you can update that, you can even take a modern praise chorus and say I don’t totally like the theological bent of th at so I will twist it in this 
other direction.” -- Pastor, larger church 
For some churches, those designed both physically and spiritually to accommodate the technologies of contemporary worship, whose congregations did not have a traditional option, nor did they seek one, the adoption and uptake of presentation, projection, audio-visual and lighting sy stems in service has been 
comparatively smooth.  For many older churches, however, accommodating contemporary services, and even beginning to infuse the more traditional services with technological aids has not been as straightforward.  The fit—the adoption and use of technologies, especially within the service—has divided the laity from many of the churches we spoke with into traditional and contemporary services.  Whether it stems from the physical reprioritization of technologies, such as putting the projection screen in front of the alter thereby obscuring the cross, or whether it is the medium and content of the sermon, we do not know, but certainly the division into two serv ices targeted at different groups 
within the laity suggests poten tial differences between how 
individuals view the role of com puting technologies in worship.  
These choices are negotiations (som e verbal, others playing out in 
the actions of the congregation su ch as which service they choose 
to attend) between the pastors and their laity.  Through these negotiations, it is possible to explore the boundaries of what constitutes acceptable adoption and use of technologies, and also see that currently it is not a straightforward answer for many pastors who struggle to balance the competing beliefs of their laity. 
4.3 Pastoral Care and Email 
All the pastors we interviewed us e email.  One use of email is 
administrative, to coordinate the work of the church.  This included email among the staff of the local church, but also, for 
some churches, communications with people in the broader 
organization to which that chur ch belonged (such as a regional 
organization headed by a bishop).  In this section, we focus on the other use of email, to communicate with the laity. In addition to their educational and preaching work, all the pastors described community work that they do with their laity.  Pastoral care includes visiting ill parishione rs, counseling those who are in 
trouble, and more generally, providing for the spiritual care of the church community.  All the pastors described this work as depending on communications with individuals, and consequently, it has a highly collaborative nature.  The conversations at a distance are one part of the process, preceding physical visits. Ministers also described complex coordination 
tasks to schedule times to talk.  One critical role that email can play for pastors is as a medium  for coordinating pastoral care 
opportunities with various parishioners. 
“Well a lot of it, most of it is just what everybody else uses it for you know sending it out, can we get together next Thursday, or what or you doing this day.” -- Pastor, smaller church. 
One type of pastoral care function is a prayer request.  Prayer requests involve asking members of  the congregation to pray for 
someone else in the congregation, or a family member.  The laity can initiate prayer requests, but  the church staff and pastors 
typically play a central role in communicating the request to the rest of the community.  For example, we conducted the bulk of our interviews in the direct aftermath of a national disaster in the USA, Hurricane Katrina, and we heard several examples of pastoral care in response to th e emergency, including prayer 
requests sent to pastors for co mmunication to the congregation: 
“I have a mother that lives in Louisiana, she was displaced by Hurricane Katrina, pray for our family they have lost everything, how can you help us, and I can respond back and say yes we will pray for you. Yes we have these resources available”  -- Pastor, smaller church 
In this example, email played a critical role in getting the information to the pastor who c ould disseminate it widely.  Large 
churches have a particular challenge in this regard given the ratio of laity to clergy.  One response that megachurches have developed to address this challe nge has been to divide their 
congregations into smaller groups, each group then being associated with a member of church staff [39]. We also saw evidence of this type of arrangement in an interview with one of the largest churches in our study.  They had developed an organizational st ructure of groups—tribes—each 
associated with a deacon. 
“I receive all of our prayer requests by e-mail, … we have a prayer team and they pray and then I get a copy of that which is updated weekly, our deacons, they do their tribe reports, I get over e-mail.  Their tribes basically being the families they oversee, any concerns that I need to know about, if one of their tribe members is hospitalized or even if there is a celebration, one of their tribe members is celebrating 30 years of marriage, those things will come to me that way.” -- Pastor, very large church. 
The weekly reports delivered by the deacon to the pastor provided a mechanism to manage and issue pr ayer requests.  This type of 
“reporting arrangement” to coordi nate information did not come 
up in conversation outside past oral care, which naturally 
emphasizes individual relationships  between members of the laity 
and the church staff, but is particularly focused on the minister. Not only does email support the efficient communication of information about the laity to th e pastor, others described how it 
provides rapid and global information dissemination 
“there were people literally praying almost around the world, because we had people in India . . .were praying because they received the e-mail, and so they were in the prayer, we had some people from London that the e-mail was forwarded to, so they received it, so I think it opened up the network so much more for prayer, and plus it is a lot quicker than calling people, because we can send one e-mail from the office and within 2 minutes 45 or 50 people have the e-mail and they can begin to pray.” 
205-- Pastor, smaller church. 
The use of email for prayer requests creates an interesting effect for the recipient, one of which so me of the ministers were very 
aware, that the reader might be at work.  For example, pastors said: 
“We just had somebody that ha d surgery yesterday and so 
we sent out on the prayer chain through the internet, you know this is who is in need of prayer, so people will get it 
while they are working, e-mails will pop-up that kind of stuff. . .” -- Pastor, smaller church. 
And 
“So what we are doing is acting as an information station, we are sending out the information … so would you please pray, …take your break at work and spend 10 minutes in prayer for this person.” -- Pastor, large church 
Significant to this analysis is the cultural tradition in the United 
States for corporations at least nominally to de-emphasize religion.  Given the participant c hurches’ location, it is reasonable 
to expect that the majority of th e laity of these churches also live 
and work in the U.S. Despite this tradition, pastors often 
mentioned a hypothesis that their laity’s email access might dominantly be at work, and work was a place where they would not only read but also respond to prayer requests.  Thus, while corporations may be assuming th at the separation of work and 
church is clear, these pastors are leveraging the fact that technology is increasingly blurring th at distinction.  Work is now 
a place where the call to pray arrives, and email facilitates that. In addition to prayer requests entering the workplace, email was also a conduit for sending other type s of materials to work.  For 
example, describing a sermon that he  had given, a pastor told us:  
“I had a woman that e-mailed me that afternoon saying she wanted me to send her a copy for her to use at work, and so Monday morning I came I e-mailed it [the requested text] to her.”  
-- Pastor, smaller church. 
Once, when computers originally entered the home, employees were able to blur the boundaries of home by bringing work to their domestic lives in the form of  telecommuting [43].  This trend 
began to change when technologi es, most particularly the Web 
began to play a role in domestic activities such as online banking [42].  Employees could now bank at work, bringing their domestic 
lives into the office.  Pastors highlighted another type of boundary blurring between the places for secular and spiritual work.  Religion’s growing presence in the workplace may pose complicated questions for employers about the provision of resources for these types of use similar to those asked about use 
of corporate resources for other personal activities. Counseling is another critical function within pastoral care.  Although they reported the use of em ail to support this function,  
the pastors reported mixed uses of  email for these purposes. They 
described situations during wh ich it allowed them to have 
conversations that would othe rwise have been impossible: 
 “A man that contacted us through our Website who said he was contemplating suicide and he wasn’t a member of 
the church. You know my first thing was to ask him over e-mail if he had a therapist and he said he did, but he didn’t feel like it was helping any, and I said well would you like to meet with me and he didn’t want to meet with me and he didn’t want to give  me his name, but we carried 
on a 3 or 4 month conversation over e-mail.” -- Pastor, large church 
Frequently, however, pastors commented on the drawbacks of email for this particular function.  Specifically, most pastors recognized the role of face-to-face communications for counseling, and tried to steer online situations into physical meetings. 
“Body language eye-to-eye contact, human relationships, I still think, e-mail and internet  is not as good as that.” 
-- Pastor, smaller church. 
Beyond the simple question of  body language, pastors also 
mentioned the spirituality of the communication.  Some pastors spoke to us of a spiritual difference in communicating through a computer and face to face. 
“God redeemed all the senses, and if all you are getting is 
what you read then I am not getting the smile that you offer or you are not seeing my body language you are not seeing, the energy the words may be said with, you are not having a chance to really fully experience anything, you’ve just got one sense at work” -- Pastor, smaller church  
The use of email to raise resources for another community, another type of pastoral care, was mentioned occasionally, perhaps in part due to the timing of our study.  Again, in the wake of Hurricane Katrina, church We bsites often supported gift giving 
to help the affected areas.  During one interview, a pastor described an upcoming trip to a nearby affected state to help victims.  He described how he em ailed his laity with a request for 
items to give to the displaced families. 
“E-mail sent to the whole congregation, … and on that e-mail I said I am leaving to go to Mississippi either Thursday or Friday of this week … I have got to have diapers, I listed this w hole list [recites list].” 
-- Pastor, small church . 
And 
“My fear is that it [technology] changes the relationship that people enjoy with other people and I believe that the world, will only have peace, will get along together, racially, socio economically, when you are people and if you are in a computer you aren’t a person, and I think it is the relationships that are important.” -- Pastor, large church.  
Like presentation technology, email has become a part of ministry 
and managing relationships with the laity.  Also like presentation technology, email does not come without its problems.  On the one hand, the immediacy email a ffords makes it a highly desirable 
medium to use to communicate to  the laity.  Parishioners no 
longer have to wait until Sunday to learn about members of the congregation that are in need of prayer, and clergy can manage their pastoral care relationships in new timely ways.  On the other hand, email also disconnects them  from their parishioners in 
certain cases, particularly counseling.  Not only does it distance them physically, reducing what we might term cues, but it simultaneously distances them spirituality.  The addition of spirituality in this particular cas e allows us to explore what it 
might mean to design technologies that facilitate the imparting of spiritual cues in a comput er-mediated conversation. 
2065. RELIGION AT HOME AND WORK 
In this paper, we reported findi ngs from a study of the religious 
uses of technologies by pastors of Protestant Christian churches in 
the metro-Atlanta area.  We found that ministers use technologies 
to support research and reflection,  worship, and pastoral care.  
Technologies included email, Wo rld-Wide web, specialized 
presentation and reference softwa re, and cellphones.  In this 
section, we reflect on the religi ous uses of technology from the 
perspectives of work-life and personal-life. 
Some religious uses of technology seemed similar to workplace 
practices. For example, in pastoral care, ministers (like employers) used technologies to coordinate action [44].  The bigger churches in particular used  technology to close the distance 
between the minister and an individual member of the laity, to create an intimate experience within  the megachurch.  Indeed, this 
finding answered one of our ques tions, that technology was being 
used to support other corporate-like practices found in megachurches [39,40]. 
And yet, while some aspects of technologically enabled religious 
practice seemed analogous to t echnologically supported corporate 
practice, others differed.  So me practices echoed previous 
research largely focused on recreational groups, in particular on-line communities.  For example, ministers described a dilemma with counseling, preferring to talk face-to-face, but recognizing that some people found it easier to discuss difficult topics in an electronically mediated setting.  This is a widely-recognized phenomenon in the study of online communities typically (but not exclusively) focused on personal-life topics [2,37]. 
While some activities could be situated in one context, work or 
personal life, others seemed to cut across these two domains simultaneously or capitalize on the existence of both.  For example, sermons while taking place “at work” for the minister, were conducted at times and in a place that is not the office for laity.  Successful presentation tool s allowed ministers to construct 
and present their sermon, a work activity, while providing laity with a spiritual message (typically not associated work life).  Indeed, we also heard from some  ministers, those offering both 
traditional and contemporary services, that the tools were more successful in bridging this divide for some laity than others. 
Finally, we also heard accounts fro m ministers about intentional 
blurring between work-life and pers onal-life.  Some ministers told 
us about using email to send out prayer requests, knowing that in 
some cases they would contact laity at work.  In addition to knowing that a number of laity only had Internet access at work, they also thought and hoped that people would carve out a time for religious practice within their work life.  Indeed, this use of 
technologies to carve out a different social space inside a physical space has also been observed in studies of cellphone users [31]. 
Scholars have long been aware of how the boundaries between 
work and personal life are consta ntly constructed and managed 
[30].  In some senses the use of  technologies within this should 
come as no surprise.  Yet, we would argue that the study of religious practice exposes the mix of work and personal life in interesting ways.  Traditionally CSCW research has tended to select domains of study that em phasize either work or personal 
life.  Most early CSCW research focused on work place settings [24].  Studies found lots of work-based coordination occurring, even informal communications serv e important work goals [11].  
More recently, both the home and public spaces have become of increasing interest to CSCW researchers.  Again, these tend to 
focus on personal collaborative life [14-16] (see [34] as an exception).  By contrast, the relig ious uses of technologies seem 
to create collaborative practices that not only cut across these domains, but also reveal the domai ns to have different meaning 
for the different people involved. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we have sought to  begin empirically the process of 
exploring questions about the religious uses of technology, particularly those associated with spiritual formation.  Being aware that technology was entering into religious life we wanted to understand what if any changes were occurring as a result.  What we found was that pastors have incorporated technology 
into three broad areas of their ministerial work: research and reflection, sermons, and pastoral care.  We learned that adoption 
of technology in spiritual practice mirrors previous experiences in both corporate and recreational uses of technology.  Further, adoption is a negotiation among clergy and laity, not always in agreement. 
We offer this study as a starting point, not just for taking up 
questions about spiritual practice infused with technology directly, but also as a mechanism for thinking about spirituality as 
another facet of human existence for many people, not just here, but also around the world.  Spirituality, and its embedding into religious life, offers another lens through which to understand 
collaboration and coordination of everyday life.  Our study suggests that the use of technology for spiritual formation simultaneously incorporates unique and familiar patterns of interaction. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank all the ministers who talked to us about 
the role of technology in religion.  Special thanks to Genevieve Bell whose talk was the inspiration for this project.  Mistakes and 
omissions remain ours. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Adam, A.K.M. Practicing the Disseminary: Technology 
Lessons from Napster. Teaching Theology and Religion , 5 
(1). 2002. 10-16. 
[2] Barnes, S.B. Computer Mediated Communication . Allyn  & 
Bacon, 2002. 
[3] Bell, G. No More SMS fro m Jesus? Ubicomp, Religion, 
and Techno-spiritual practices.  To appear in Proceedings 
of Ubicomp 06  (Irvine, CA, 2006). 
[4] Brasher, B.E. Give Me That Online Religion . Jossey-Bass, 
San Francisco, 2001. 
[5] Bruce, S. Pray TV: Televangelism in America . Routledge, 
London, England, 1990. 
[6] Campbell, H. Making Space for Religion in Internet 
Studies. The Information Society , 21. 2005. 309-315. 
[7] Dawson, L.L. and Cowan, D. eds. Religion Online: Finding 
Faith on the Internet . Routledge Press, New York, NY, 
2004. 
[8] Durkheim, E. Elementary Forms of Religious Life (New 
Translation by Karen Fields) . Free Press, 1995. 
[9] English, L.M. Spiritual Dime nsions of Informal Learning. 
New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education  (85). 
2000. 29-38. 
207[10] Fischer, C.S. America Calling: A Social History of the 
Telephone to 1940 . University of California Press, 
Berkeley, CA, 1992. 
[11] Galegher, J., Kraut, R. and Egido, C. eds. Intellectual 
teamwork: Social and technological foundations of cooperative work . Lawrence Erlbaum A ssociates, Hillsdale, 
NJ, 1990. 
[12] Giddens, A., Duneier, M. and Appelbaum, R.P. 
Introduction to Sociology . W.W. Norton and Company, 
New York, 2003. 
[13] Graham, S.L. Theological Education on the Web: A Case 
Study in the Formation for Ministry. Teaching Theology 
and Religion , 5 (4). 2002. 227-235. 
[14] Grinter, R.E., Aoki, P.M., Hurst, A., Szymanski, M.H., 
Thornton, J.D. and Woodruff, A., Revisiting the Visit: Understanding How Technology Can Shape the Museum Visit. In Proceedings of  ACM Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW 2002) , (New Orleans, 
LA, 2002), New York, NY: ACM Press, 146-155. 
[15] Grinter, R.E., Edwards, W.K., Newman, M. and 
Ducheneaut, N., The Work to Make the Home Network Work. In Proceedings of  The 9th European Conference on 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work , (Paris, France, 
2005), Kluwer Academic Press, 469-488. 
[16] Grinter, R.E. and Eldridge, M., y do tngrs luv 2 txt msg? In 
Proceedings of  Seventh European Conference on 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work ECSCW '01 , 
(Bonn, Germany, 2001), Dordrecht, Netherlands:  Kluwer Academic Publishers, 219-238. 
[17] Hadden, J. and Shupe, A.  Televangelism in America. Social 
Compass , 34 (1). 1987. 61-75. 
[18] Hess, M.E. Pedagogy and Theology in Cyberspace: All that 
We Can't Leave Behind... Teaching Theology and Religion , 
5 (1). 2002. 30-38. 
[19] Hlubinka, M., Beaudin, J., Tapia, E.M. and An, J.S., 
AltarNation: Interface Design for Meditative Communities. In Proceedings of  Extended Abstracts of the ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computer Systems (CHI 2002) , (Minneapolis, Minnesota, 2002), ACM Press, 612-
613. 
[20] Hoover, S.M., Clark, L.S. and Rainie, L. Faith Online: 64% 
of wired americans have used the Internet for spiritual or religious purposes. 2004. 
[21] Jinkins, M. Theological Dot Education: A Review of The 
Almond Springs Website. Teaching Theology and Religion , 
5 (1). 2002. 49-55. 
[22] Kong, L. Religion and t echnology: refiguring place, space, 
identity and community. Area , 33 (4). 2001. 404-413. 
[23] Lofland, J. and Lofland, L.H. Analyzing Social Settings: A 
Guide to Qualitative Observation and Analysis . 
Wadsworth, Belmont, CA, 1995. 
[24] Luff, P., Hindmarsh, J. and Heath, C. eds. Workplace 
Studies: Recovering Work Practice and Informing System Design . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 
2000. 
[25] Mayer, R.E. and Moreno, R. Nine Ways to Reduce 
Cognitive Load in Multimedia Learning. Educational 
Psychologist , 38 (1). 2003. 43-52. 
[26] MIT Forum Religion and the Internet. 
http://web.mit.edu/comm-forum/forums/religion.html . 2002. [27] Moore, J.D. Visions of Culture: An Introduction oto 
Anthropological Theories and Theorists . AltaMira Press, 
Walnut Creek, CA, 1997. 
[28] Muller, M.J., Christiansen, E. and Nardi, B. Can We Have 
Spiritual Experiences On-Line? SIG at CHI 2000.  2000. 
[29] Newman, J.O. The Word Made Print: Luther's 1522 New 
Testament in an Age of Mechanical Reproduction. Representations , 11. 1985. 95-133. 
[30] Nippert-Eng, C.E. Home and Work . University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago, IL, 1995. 
[31] Palen, L., Salzman, M. and Youngs, E., Going Wireless: 
Behavior and Practice of New Mobile Phone Users. In Proceedings of  ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW 2000) , (Philadelphia, PA, 2000), 
New York, N.Y.: ACM Press, 201-210. 
[32] Rainie, L., Fox, S., Horriga n, J., Lenhart, A., Spooner, T., 
Lewis, O. and Carter, C. Wi red Churches, Wired Temples: 
Taking Congregations and Missions in Cyberspace. Pew 
Internet and American Life Project . 2000. 
http://www.pewinternet.org/. 
[33] Robinson, F. Technology a nd Religious Change: Islam and 
the Impact of Print1. Modern Asian Studies , 27 (1). 1993. 
229-251. 
[34] Salazar, C., Building Boundaries and Negotiating Work at 
Home. In Proceedings of  International ACM SIGGROUP 
Conference on Supporting Group Work (GROUP 01) , 
(Boulder, CO, 2001), ACM Press, 162-170. 
[35] Schultze, Q.J. Habits of the High-Tech Heart: Living 
Virtuously in the Information Age . Baker Academic, 2002. 
[36] Seel, J. The Evangelical Forfeit: Can We Recover . Baker 
Books, Grand Rapids: MI, 1995. 
[37] Smith, M.A. and Kollock, P. eds. Communities in 
Cyberspace . Routledge, New York, NY, 1999. 
[38] Sproull, L. and Kiesler, S. Connections: New Ways of 
Working in the Networked Organization . MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA., 1991. 
[39] The Economist Jesus, CEO: Churches as Businesses. The 
Economist  (Dec 20, 2005). 2005. 
http://www.economist.com/world/ na/displaystory.cfm?stor
y_id=5323597&no_jw_tran=5323591&no_na_tran=5323591. 
[40] Thumma, S.L. The Kingdom, The Power, and The Glory: 
Megachurches in Modern American Society . Doctoral 
Dissertation, Emory University, Atlanta GA., 1996. 
[41] Vaughan, J.N. Megachurches and America's Cities: How 
Churches Grow . Baker Books, Grand Rapids, 1993. 
[42] Venkatesh, A., Kruse, E. and Shih, E.C.-F. The Networked 
Home: An Analysis of Current Developments and Future Trends. Cognition, Technology and Work , 5 (1). 2003. 23-
32. 
[43] Vitalari, N.P., Venkatesh, A. and Gronhaug, K. Computing 
in the Home: Shifts in the Time Allocation Patterns of Households. Communications of the ACM , 28
 (5). 1985. 
512-522. 
[44] Yates, J. Control through Communication: The Rise of 
System in American Management . The Johns Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimore, Maryland, 1989. 
[45] Zeph, C.P. The Spiritual Dimensions of Lay Ministry 
Programs. New Directions for Adult and Continuing 
Education  (85). 2000. 77-84. 
 
208