Transient Relics
Temporal Tangents to an Ancient Virtual Pilgrimage
Angelo Fraietta
a.fraietta@unsw.edu.au
University of New South Wales
Paddington, NSW, Australia
ABSTRACT
This paper examines creating a temporary virtual relic through
the creation of an interactive soundscape in the context of a
religious pilgrimage known as the Stations of The Cross. The
paper examines the history of the rite and its transforma-
tion from a physical pilgrimage to a virtual one. It examines
the phenomenon of iconic relics, which in some case have
a reckoned value equivalent to that of the physical objects
they represent. Also, it examines both the conceptual and
legal implications of embodying sound into tangible objects,
resulting in their treatment as protected relics. Finally, it
describes the creation of an artwork, whereby religious pil-
grims manipulate interactive sonic balls that communicate
with other networked sonic devices in an attempt to correlate
metaphors of human behaviours—such as play, humiliation,
and mobs—into a sonic relic of the historical narrative of
Christ taunted by Roman soldiers.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →Sound-based input
/ output ;•Social and professional topics →Religious
orientation ;•Applied computing →Ethnography ;Sound
and music computing.
KEYWORDS
Rituals; Pilgrimage; Relics; Networks; NIME; DIADs; Happy-
Brackets; Tangible Sound
ACM Reference Format:
Angelo Fraietta. 2020. Transient Relics: Temporal Tangents to an
Ancient Virtual Pilgrimage. In Fourteenth International Conference
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
©2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6107-1/20/02. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3374920.3374923on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI’20), Febru-
ary 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3374920.3374923
1 INTRODUCTION
The "Internet of Sounds" [ 76, p. 81] has enabled people to
access thousands of hours of pre-recorded audio from online
databases. The advent of microcontrollers and single board
computers has enabled the development of tangible embed-
ded sonic devices with inbuilt sensors [ 24] with the facility to
access this audio. Digital Signal Processing (DSP) enables one
to manipulate these sounds using compositional techniques
that map physical and gestural inputs to audio parameters
[55], and when coupled with human computer interfaces, en-
ables tangible control of the audio. Tangible sonic interface
implementations include tangible electronic synthesisers and
sequencers [ 44,62], teaching aids for dyslexic children [ 6,32],
the exploration of sound composition through interaction
[13,71] and the conceptualisation of human environments
through cognition [ 65]. Research focused on metaphor based
interaction using tangible embedded instruments; however,
indicates that "[a]lthough metaphorical mappings are pro-
moted in tangible and embodied interaction research, little is
known about how to identify embodied metaphors, or how
to implement them effectively into interaction models" [ 8,
p. 433].
The ability to capture and store sound effectively creates a
snapshot of sound from a point in history. When the record-
ing is played back, it is effectively a sonic relic of that mo-
ment in history. The ability to store and recall these sonic
relics into embedded devices that can be held or touched
enables the user to physically interact with the relic during
playback—a similar concept to holding the photograph of
a loved one that has passed away. The abstract nature of
the digital medium renders the embodiment of the relic only
temporal or transient.
Anthropologists have observed that relic-related behaviour
is a common phenomenon of global human cultural practices
[40]. People throughout history in all cultures have regarded
special personages—such as gods, royalty, ancestors, saints,
heroes and celebrities—as sources of power. Moreover, in ad-
dition to their body parts and items they have touched, power
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
377TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia Angelo Fraietta
has also been attributed to images, with equivalence attrib-
uted to them, resulting in the great value of many works of
art and memorabilia. The value of relics are often indexed ac-
cording to the number of people willing to make the journey
to see them [40]—a behaviour known as pilgrimage [27].
Ethnographers and historians have noted that The Stations
of the Cross —also known as The Way of the Cross (Via Crucis)
[21]—is a religious rite or practice, that although formalised
in the eighteenth-century European Roman Catholicism tra-
dition [ 5,48], is practised by many orthodox and protestant
Christian churches in culturally diverse ways to this day
[21,43]. Furthermore, many artists have used them as a basis
for raising awareness of social and political issues, including
martyrdom and death, through the use of inference, abstrac-
tion and parallelism [22, 48, 70].
This paper intends to extend this research through the
exploration of the nature of relics and argues that they can
be stored and retrieved not only as high fidelity reproduc-
tions of historical objects—such as sound or images—but can
be invoked through artistic composition that maps tangible
interaction to behavioural and sociological concepts. It de-
scribes how thirteen Distributed Interactive Audio Devices
(DIADs) were used to create a unified tangible relic for the
creation and performance of an interactive art work in the
context of a public religious pilgrimage. This paper will first
describe the nature of relics and how sound is treated as a
relic. Next, the anthropological history and religious practice
of the Stations of the Cross from their conception up until
the present, and how the composer originally intended this
work to be perceived and performed by the audience within
that context. Next, a description of how the technology was
utilised to attempt to correlate the concepts of play, culpa-
bility, mobs and humiliation to physical interaction, spacial
sonification and sample selection. Finally, a technical and
artistic analysis of the performance, detailing both the effec-
tive and ineffective techniques, with ideas on how the work
can be refined.
2 CONTEXT OF RESEARCH
The DIAD was first introduced in 2014 as "an experimen-
tal design for creative sound and music performance and
interaction using multiplicities of networked, portable com-
puters" [ 18, p. 604]. The devices contained a Raspberry Pi
and an inertial measurement unit (IMU), and when handled
by the audience and incorporated into the environment, they
not only responded to user manipulation, but they also re-
sponded to one another. The focus of the project was the
development of a reusable platform that allowed creators to
easily develop interactive audio and easily deploy it to other
devices, and was incorporated into a musical game of bowls
and exhibited in Musify+Gamify in Sydney Vivid 2015 [15]The next implementation of DIADs was realised in two
compositions for improvisational dance and live coding in
the form of interactive sonic balls. The first work, So Pre-
dictable!? [19] performed at the Now Now festival in Sydney
and then at NIME 2018, focused on merging movement im-
provisation with indeterminate sonic balls, where neither the
performer or audience are able to predict the sound the balls
will make. The second work extended the concept and was
realised as a semi-improvised sound game and presented at
CHI PLAY 2018, where each player was invited to explore the
relationship of movement to sound through play [ 46]. The
networked configuration of two DIADs enabled collective
modes of interaction and behaviour, effectively sharing each
player’s movement features between the two balls.
DIADs were then used for an interactive virtual space-
craft game, where the networked capability of the DIAD
was used to control a planetarium software display, where
the player could virtually fly towards a celestial object [ 37].
One the notable aspect of the game was that a zero gravity
effect could be simulated by removing accelerometer control.
The author later developed an interactive workshop for Na-
tional Science Week [ 34] whereby school children learned
to program the virtual spacecraft using HappyBrackets [ 16]
coupled with a library for controlling planetarium software
[36]. One of the features leveraged in the workshop was the
facility to simulate a embedded device within the coding
environment without requiring them to send code to the
physical device [ 38]. In particular, the ability to simulate
a device’s accelerometer and gyroscope sensors facilitated
code evaluation and debugging, producing greater creative
flux [56].
Research into IoT controlled devices using HappyBrack-
ets was further extended in Spiral [17]—an interactive in-
stallation for MIDI controlled electromechanical percussion,
Disklavier, MaxMSP and twenty-five Raspberry Pis hanging
in a spiral formation from the ceiling. Inspired by the con-
cept of the traditional player piano, Spiral is a mechanical
and distributed performance that captured the musical style
of the improvisational music ensemble Tangents [16]. The
work—installed at the Museum of Applied Arts and Sciences,
Sydney, in 2019—effectively functioned as a relic in two roles.
First, It captured the musical style of the group by simu-
lating the ensemble’s piano, bass, drums, and guitar using
autonomous playback through virtual instruments. Second,
it highlighted the concept of the player piano, a historical in-
strument used for playing back music mechanically through
the use of pre-punched piano roll recordings though a real
piano in the same era as the phonograph. In describing the
player piano, Suisman notes that "it seems like a curious
mechanical stopover on the route from manual music mak-
ing to digital storage and playback. To the extent that it is
remembered at all, it is usually cast as a historical also-ran, a
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
378Transient Relics TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
postscript to the age of the piano, a foil to the more dramatic
advent of the phonograph" [ 78, p. 13], with scholars often
treating it as "a relic, a trace of a transitional moment in our
musical and technological past" [78, p. 25].
The previous research projects raised two main questions.
First, although it was possible to simulate a single tangible
object, how could one concurrently simulate a multiplicity
of say ten or twenty devices within the coding environment?
Second, what types of complex metaphors could be encoded
into an artistic work that exploits features of DIADs—their
tangible and interactive nature, their ability to communicate
with one another, the facility to distribute and sonify them
spatially, the capability to store large amounts of audio on
them and the ability to quickly modify and deploy code to
them using HappyBrackets [ 16,38]. The author attempted
to address these questions through the implementation of
an artwork that functioned as a symbolic relic to facilitate
a tangible mechanism for meditation and contemplation by
sojourners on their virtual pilgrimage.
Relics and Pilgrimage
Prior to the 1960s, "pilgrimage had been more or less the
exclusive domain of ethnographers, church historians and
theologians, who had been analyzing the phenomenon since
the nineteenth century" [ 51, p. 16]. Anthropologists have
noted that Western distinctions between the behaviour pat-
terns of religious and secular human beings with regard to
the value of relics is in many cases very minor, and in some
cases can be discarded [ 40]. Hooper argues that "[c]ulturally
specific assumptions, categories and vocabulary deriving
from Christian, Islamic, Buddhist, Polynesian or any other
tradition need to be set aside or used with care, so that com-
mon underlying patterns of behaviour can be recognised and
identified" [ 40, p. 189]. Moreover, the "common observation
that museums and galleries are the new temples is more
than a metaphor: it is true at the level of practice" [ 40, p. 184].
Strong similarities are observed between an "explicitly reli-
gious pilgrimage and a journey to Graceland or to a block-
buster exhibition because they involve equivalent behaviours
that collapse the unhelpful distinction between pilgrimage
to religious/sacred site and visit to secular/profane display.
Seen at the level of practice, or behaviour, both activities in-
volve sacrifices of time and resources in order to engage with
something that has the power to be life-enhancing physically,
spiritually, medically, emotionally, intellectually or socially"
[40, p. 183]. This type of behaviour is also observed of per-
sons who would be referred to as secular or scientific with
pilgrimages to Down House, the home of Charles Darwin
[9] or places associated with Galileo [72].
There are generally three recognised relic classes: [ 40,
p. 194-94]•Type A: corporeal relics —artefacts that are body remains
or the actual substance of the special personage; e.g.
the Holy Blood of Christ, Buddha’s tooth, ancestors’
bones, Nelson’s hair;
•Type B: contact or associative relics —items that the spe-
cial personage has touched or been near to; e.g. pieces
of the True Cross, Luther’s bed, Michael Jackson’s
glove, Darwin’s home; and
•Type C: iconic or substitute relics —objects that are equiv-
alents or substitutes for the body of a special person-
age; e.g. an icon of the Virgin, statue of a saint, the
Quran, a portrait of Nelson.
Although some argue that Type C are not true relics in a
sense that the special personage may not have touched or
been in close proximity to the artefact, many cultures treat
Type C articles—such as the Quaran or the Eucharist—as
tangible embodiments through consecration, and are thus
venerated as though they were Type A or B relics [ 40]. The
facility to convert an absent special personage into a tangible
Type C relic is not only possible with image or sound record-
ing devices, it is also within the domain of the artist, evident
through the existence of a plethora of religious iconography.
Moreover, the artist is able to enhance or elucidate believed
attributes of the special personage that would not be visible
in Type A or B relics and recordings. For example, the halo
or nimbus that signifies the spiritual character that is used in
artworks throughout history in many cultures is not perceiv-
able with the human eye outside of art. Similarly, the Scared
Heart of Jesus, inspired by the mystic visions of Marguerite
Marie Alacoque (1647–1690) [ 73], is an abstract concept de-
picted by Pompeo Batoni (1708–1787), which has become a
ubiquitous image in Catholic iconography. Although there
are no references in the Bible to a visible flame of fire ema-
nating from Jesus’ heart, the artist is able to conceptualise
the concept of a "furnace of love" [ 73, p. 19] through the use
of a visual metaphor.
Sonic Relics
Sound is not a tangible object, and therefore, can not be
preserved as a Type A relic. Sound is energy transmitted
in waves through a physical medium [ 68] and can become
tangible by transduction when sound pressure waves are
converted from one form of energy to another. Researchers
have investigated the phenomenon of deaf people experi-
encing music through vibrations transmitted through floors,
walls, chairs and speakers to be felt and experienced [ 39,58,
59]. Sound was originally recorded using the phonograph,
whereby the sound energy cut grooves into wax cylinders
through a mechanical stylus [ 41]. This left a tangible relic of
the sonic event, where the physical groove correlated to the
original sound pressure waves. The wax cylinder could be
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
379TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia Angelo Fraietta
likened to a Type B relic, where the original sound touched
the wax through the stylus and left a tangible mark. In Aus-
tralia, the Copyright Act 1968 provides automatic protection
of artistic works that have become tangible, or given "‘ma-
terial form’... There used to be much debate as to whether
the ‘material form’ had to be ‘visible to the eye’ but the
Copyright Act is now clear that the term covers any form of
storage from which the work can be reproduced, including
digital storage" [ 75, p. 145-146]. In this instance, it is not the
sound itself that is the "material form," but effectively the
intangible set of instructions required to make a recognis-
able manifestation of the work. When these instructions are
translated and played back through a physical device, they
become tangible again. These instructions effectively cause
the medium to be Type C relics, in that they are substitutes
for the original sound, and given equivalent value. This tan-
gible stored recording—whether it be by phonograph, player
piano rolls, cassette, or digitally—is protected under law as
the "mechanical right" and is noted on the recording using
theP○symbol [75].
Some sounds have immense commercial value for brand-
ing, with some being protected as trademarks. These include
the MGM lion roar, the sound of a Harley Davidson motor-
cycle motor, and many others [ 61]. The commercial value
is the entity that the sound represents. Garth Paine created
the series Endangered Sounds [61], where sounds that were
protected as registered trademarks, that although ubiquitous
in nature, were illegal to play in public without the appro-
priate licence. Paine explores this issue in that the audio
was recorded onto devices that played the sound through
speakers that were encased in a vacuum, thus preventing
any sound from being heard.
Recordings of dead persons and playback of past news
broadcasts can have deep personal effect, such as voice-
mail messages of 9-11 victims[ 26]. Legislation and volun-
tary codes of ethics regarding indigenous remains, including
warnings about voices and images of dead people being dis-
played, are now included as standard practices in the media
[3,12,42]. Physically, there is no material connection be-
tween a stored copy of the recorded voice and the actual
person who made the sound. The sample is only data that
can be used to reconstruct or reproduce the sound. Once
the sample has been translated into audio and recognised, it
is treated as a relic. The ability to facilitate sound playback
into embedded devices enables one to hold an object that
in a sense is an embodiment or a shadow of the original
person making the sound, and in turn inherit that sacred
value. One could imagine smashing a hand held device that
was playing the voice of a dead loved one is very different
to just smashing the device while it was silent or playing
something completely unrelated—a similar concept to tear-
ing a photograph of a deceased loved one. In a sense, thedevice has become temporarily sacred by virtue of the sound
it is making at that point in time, and handling the device is
akin in a sense to touching the person who originally spoke
the sound. This phenomenon enables the tangible device to
temporarily become a Type C relic.
Some sound recordings are almost universally recognised,
and define an exact time and place of when they were spoken.
For example, the statement Neil Armstrong’s made when
he first stepped on the moon—which was watched on live
television by an "estimated 600 million people, about one-
quarter of the human population at the time" [ 77, p. 279]—
defines an exact time and place: 20 July 1969 on the Moon.
The metaphor he used, "one small step ... one giant leap",
however, has now become "a cliché, a catch phrase, and even
a punchline" [ 79]. In time, well known fragments of spoken
text often become ingrained in the common discourse of
everyday life, and are effectively relics of historical events
or works [ 49,49,67]. Some of the most ubiquitous examples
would be the works of Shakespeare, with hundreds of quotes
having become a part of standard conversational English
[69, 84].
The Virtual Pilgrimage
Although the Stations of the Cross are a sequential reflection
of the suffering and death of Christ, starting from Jesus’ con-
demnation to his death and entombment, it is very different
to the dramatisation through the Passion play [ 81] or cinema
[50]. The dramatisation is effectively a performance where
the producer provides a complete story and the audience is
a passive observer. The stations, however, are set of defined
points in the narrative where the participant is required to
wait at each station in sincere meditation [80].
When Constantine became the Roman Emperor in the
fourth-century, he declared Christianity religio licita, re-
versing the effect of a first-century senatus consultum that
made Christianity an illegal cult [ 66]. He initiated the build-
ing of the Basilica of the Holy Sepulcher in 326AD, built
on what was believed to be the tomb of Christ [ 60],which
consequently became a popular place of pilgrimage [ 5,21].
Writings of the fourth-century pilgrim Egeria describe the
earnestness of these journeys, with a significant feature be-
ing that passages of scripture fitting to the location were
read at each stop of the pilgrimage [ 28]. Over time, a wind-
ing track emerged from where it was believed Jesus stood
before Pilate to the Basilica. Pilgrims travelled en masse to
Jerusalem to walk along the road which became known as
Via Dolorosa (the Way of Suffering), venerating the various
stations along the way [ 48]. Travelling to the Holy Land was
both expensive and dangerous, and consequently, various
simulations of the stations were made throughout Europe in
the late middle-ages whereby people who could not afford to
travel could share the experience [80]. Originally restricted
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
380Transient Relics TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
to Franciscans in 1686, the program was eventually spread to
all churches by 1731 with an encouragement for each church
to include them [ 5], resulting in a "ubiquitous spread of the
Stations of the Cross, in the wake of Catholic missionary
activity and the general advance of colonialism" [ 48, p. 3].
The stations were normally installed as a series of pictures
or tableaux that represented certain scenes that correspond
to the point of devotion [ 5]. Although the number of stations
varied from five to more than thirty throughout history, the
official number was fixed at fourteen; however, only eight
of them were actually scripturally based [ 5,21,48]. Pope
John Paul II modified the stations in 1991 so as to only in-
clude stations that are based on scripture [ 52,54]. No longer
an exclusive Catholic practice, "walking the stations is in-
creasingly embraced by Christians of all denominations" [ 21,
p. 58] with many churches or institutions modifying the
stations to suit their needs.
One could argue that the veneration changed from the
associative Type B relics to the substitutive Type C when
pilgrimage moved away from Jerusalem. This argument is
supported with Pope Innocent XI declaring that undertaking
the Stations of the Cross in ones own church was equal to
physically visiting the actual sites [ 5]. Each station, however,
is only a trigger by which the pilgrim’s inner journey is
facilitated, and in a sense are only temporal and transient.
3 RELATED WORK
Although originally a European Roman Catholic tradition,
the Stations of the Cross are culturally rendered for the in-
tended pilgrim [ 48,63,70,74]. Also, although initially a
method by which the pilgrim reflected on their own life, a
plethora of artists and curators in various churches, muse-
ums, and other public places have used metaphors of the
stations to raise awareness of social injustice [ 22]. Rev. Catri-
ona Laing states "This particular Christian devotional lends
itself to modern interpretation. The Way of the Cross that
Jesus walked as a traditional thing is traditionally a moment
to reflect on someone who was oppressed, who was poor,
who was a refugee at one time in his life, someone who was
ultimately cast out and wrongly condemned" [ 85]. Various
churches have hosted diverse prayer walks, such as: four-
teen stops focusing on the plight of refugees; stopping at the
location of fourteen homicides; or fourteen aspects of drug
addiction [ 85]. Other topics included have been a critique of
the justice system, the ostracisation of Gay people during
the AIDs epidemic, and Black Lives Matter coupled with the
gun debate. For example, in the latter theme, Jesus falls for
the first time is represented with "black figure of the Virgin
Mary, her hands up, as if telling someone not to shoot" [ 22]
with a smaller image of Jesus over her the same pose within
the cross-hairs of a gun. Curators have also worked with
artists of other faiths seeking contribution, including Hindu,Buddhist, Jewish and Islamic, drawing on common ground
between different faiths.
Other realisation of the Stations of the Cross use artworks
that were not created in the context of the passion, however,
are recontextualised and used as analogies, parallels and
tangents. The Smithsonian American Art Museum (SAAM)
hosted an exhibition of the Stations of the Cross that had
eighteen stations that placed works at various stations where
the theme of the artwork could be used to represent the
station [ 43]. For example, Look Down That Road (1942) by
Charles Pollock was used for the second station Jesus takes up
his cross. Pollock, in this oil on canvas painted during WWII,
features "a black man sit[ting]... on a suitcase, pondering
a future that lies around a bend in the road and cannot be
seen [, which]....evokes the turmoil experienced by many
men as they left their homes and families to join the war
effort"[ 64]. The parallel is drawn in that the work symbolises
the pensive Christ contemplating the road of suffering that
he faces [ 43]. Similar parallels are made using the artworks of
many respected contemporary artists, including William H.
Johnson, Beauford Delaney, and Bruria Finkel, whose works
have been re-contextualised to fit in with a particular station.
Other artists have used the stations as a theme outside the
context of the Christian pilgrimage. For example, Barnett
Newman, "a Jewish artist painting in America in the postwar
period, the explicit invocation of the Stations of the Cross
offers a means of figuring, albeit abstractly, a forsakenness
that is no longer, or not only, theological and Christian, but
historical and Jewish "[ 70, p. 38]. Similarly, Gerhard Richter,
who "renounced religion as a teenager" [ 70, p. 42] produced
art where "Christian iconography comes together with an
avowedly secular painterly practice, producing something
of a secularised cycle of martyrdom" [70, p. 42].
These examples show that the Stations of the Cross have
been used both as a target, to which the the goal is to draw
the audience or viewer into a closer personal or collective
Christian religious experience; and as a conceptual spring-
board, through which abstract tangent points are used to
direct or deflect the audience to conceptual ideas that are
not specifically related to the passion of Christ.
4 THE VIRTUAL STATION AT THE STATION
New City Baptist Church commissioned local artists to present
artworks for a Stations of the Cross event at the defunct
Newcastle train station and was open to the public on Good
Friday 2019. Hundreds of people attended the two-hour exhi-
bition, from individuals to large families. The attendees were
led through the stations—which included paintings, origami,
poetry, interactive media art, graphic design, and sculpture—
in groups of about four or five in order to experience each
station in it’s proper sequence. The work described in this
paper is an interactive artwork for the station Jesus taunted
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
381TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia Angelo Fraietta
by the Roman guards, recorded in Mark 15:16-19 [14,35]. Al-
though not one of the traditional stations, it is included in
the scriptural account of the Passion of Christ. The piece was
an immersive sonic soundscape whereby the participants
handled interactive sonic balls, which determined how the
work would progress. The composer only had ten days to
create the work, which meant that there was no opportunity
to assess how the participants would actually use the balls.
The original source material is a historical literary work—a
relic of events recorded in the past. Narration of the passage
was foundational and culturally appropriate in the context
of the installation. The work was highly abstract, however,
the concepts used in the artwork did not focus on social or
political issues. Instead, tangents were made between the
physical objects participants were manipulating at the time
and theological concepts relating to the event that was being
represented through the use of irony and parallelism. Judeo-
Christian teaching has from it’s earliest time used metaphors
or parables to communicate religious teaching, and often
used highly abstract concepts that are incomprehensible to
the uninitiated, which are often not recognised or understood
until meditation after the event or from explanation [ 53]. The
work was created using DIADs, shown in Figure 1:one large
ball representing Jesus, two smaller balls as principle guards,
and ten other DIADs as the remaining Roman soldier cohort.
The theme of this station was the mocking of Jesus, and
therefore, a examination of the specific event and the type
of mocking is required in order to select suitable parallels.
The Mocking of Christ
The scriptures record that Jesus was condemned by Pilate
to be crucified (Matt. 27:26, Mark 15:15, Luke 23:25, John
19:16)[ 14]. Crucifixion was used by Romans as the most se-
vere form of punishment, originally reserved for crimes of
incest and treason, and that "the horror and disgust of cru-
cifixion lay as much in the public shame that was involved
more than the physical torture itself[, and used for the] total
humiliation and degradation of an enemy" [ 33, p. 126]. Hu-
miliation is still used today as a method of punishment in
criminal justice, particularly through the use of mass media
[45], where the person is publicly ridiculed [ 29]. "One can
be humiliated when one fails to maintain the appearance
appropriate to the rank or role that one in fact occupies" [ 83,
p. 1793]. Waldron observes that "[t]his sort of humiliation
is the stuff of comedy; we delight in seeing ... the almost
desperate way in which an imposter struggles to maintain
the appearance he has cultivated, and in seeing the effort
come to nothing as the pretension collapses in a moment
of unequivocal deflation. Of course, the mirth is also part
of the experience of humiliation, for now the humiliated
person is exposed not merely as not the man he pretended
to be ... but as an imposter, a pretender, the butt of ridicule,someone who has made a fool of himself" [ 83, p. 1793-94].
This appears to be the type of humiliation recorded in the
narrative of Mark 15:16-19 [14].
The goal for the artist was to abstract fundamental or
iconic facets of this event and superimpose them into a tangi-
ble artwork that would touch on key aspects of the narrative,
conjuring an interactive substitutionary relic of the event.
Previously, artists have created tangible experiences of the
various stations through the use of props that are realistic
representations or replicas of articles that may have been
used, such as a touching a crown of thorns or hammering
their sins to a wooden cross with large nails [ 21]. Digital
technologies, however, enable the artist to instantaneously
transform an object’s original function and behaviour com-
pletely. The artist mapped certain historical and theological
aspects through the use of parallel concepts, where the act
of humiliating Christ becomes manifest in the audience’s
interaction with the artwork. The purpose of each station
of the cross is to provide a portal or trigger to allow the
pilgrim to meditate or contemplate that particular moment
of the passion of Christ. Instead of allowing the audience to
be passive observers, the work attempts to implicate their
complicity, where they themselves were the ones guilty of
taunting Christ in the form of a cruel game.
The first concept was that all people were complicit in
the suffering of Christ, challenging the pilgrim to contem-
plate their own guilt. "‘Walking the Stations’ is ... an es-
sentially penitential journey, premised on the participant’s
selfacknowledged complicity in the necessary violence of
Christ’s Passion" [ 48, p. 12]. Many artists have addressed
this though the use of a viewer’s perspective. For example,
Giovanni Pisano’s Pisa Pulpit (1302-10) uses "oblique and
over-the-shoulder viewpoints ... [to] situate the viewer in
the ‘live-action’ drama of the Passion [ that insinuates ]
‘participatory involvement’ ... [and] a measure of complic-
ity in the ethical encounter of Christ’s public humiliation"
[48, p. 15]. Rembrandt takes this further in his work The
Raising of the Cross (c. 1633), where he paints and spotlights
himself in lifting Christ at the crucifixion. Similarly, rather
than creating an artwork where the audience were merely
observers or passively complicit in the mocking of Christ,
the composer sought to make them the actual perpetrators
of the suffering through their tangible interaction with the
artwork.
Another major concept was the appearance that soldiers
humiliated by "playing" with the victim. The two sonic ball
DIADs from the interactive dance works described in section
2 [19,46] were used as participant interfaces because balls
are often associated with games, for both competition and
fun. The pilgrims play with the sonic balls, symbolising the
soldiers playing a game with Christ.
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
382Transient Relics TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Figure 1: Cast of DIADs used in the Stations of the Cross.
The final concept touched upon was the collective and cal-
culated mechanism used by the Roman soldiers to humiliate
Christ. Although it was customary for a person condemned
to crucifixion "to be handed over to a four-man execution
squad who would parade the convict through the streets
to the site of crucifixion" [ 33, p. 126], both narratives state
that the whole company were gathered together in the act
of taunting (Mat. 27:27, Mark 15:16)[ 14]. Alexander notes
"[j]okes that implicitly exclude or lower the status of some
individual or recognizable group by explicitly reinforcing
fellowship or cohesiveness or unity in the group (among the
individuals) sharing the joke "[ 4, p. 258]. Moreover, Martin
observes that a "crowd is a device for indulging ourselves in a
kind of temporary insanity by all going crazy together" (cited
in) [20, p. 28-29]. Furthermore, "crowd membership results in
a lessening of the person’s ability to think rationally whilst at
the same time, his more primitive impulses are elicited in an
harmonious fashion with the emerging primitive impulses
of all the other crowd members" [ 20, p. 28]. Two audible
symbols that can be used to evoke this sense of collective
cruelty through directed humiliation are repetitive chanting
and maniacal laughter.Repetitive collective chanting is a behaviour often exhib-
ited in crowds and is considered a norm [ 7,20]. "Chanting has
... been referred to as a means of focussing thought. One of
the most significant aspects of a chant is its short, repetitive
auditory rhythm: a feature used in ceremonies and enter-
tainments in cultures ranging from the most "primitive" to
the most "civilized" as a means of getting people "worked
up"" [ 20, p. 30]. Sounding a collective chant is therefore an
effective mechanism to symbolise crowd behaviour. Specif-
ically, the chant "Hail, King of the Jews!" is quintessential
in contextualising the work, cited in three of the four pas-
sion narratives (Matt. 27:29, Mark 15:18, John 19:2) [ 14]. The
chanting, therefore, becomes a portal by which the pilgrim
can contemplate that it was not simply a small group of
soldiers who taunted Christ, but the whole company.
Although maniacal laughter is often used today as a recog-
nisable symbol of insanity [ 11], laughter is also technique
used in satire since classical times [ 57]. Dillon notes, "[t]here
is nothing funny about laughter in Greek tragedy ... [, particu-
larly] where the laughter involves outright mockery, and the
relationship between the mocker and the mocked is strictly
hostile" [ 25, p. 345]. Most notable is where the "source of
this laughter lies in the other’s afflictions" [ 25, p. 346], as it
would appear in the treatment of Christ by the soldiers. Fur-
thermore, it appears to be satirical in that there is ridicule by
the way of their ironical treatment of him as a king in their
use of a purple garment, sceptre and crown. Similarly, their
greeting "Hail, King of the Jews!...mimicks the well known
greeting extended to the Roman emperor: (H)ave Caesar! or
(H)ave Imperator! (e.g. Suetonius, Divus Claudius 21.6: ’Hail,
Emperor, they who are about to die salute you’)" [ 31, p. 72].
The maniacal laughter provides the pilgrim a portal to con-
template the public humiliation placed upon Christ coupled
with the cruelty of being laughed at during His affliction.
The facility for networked DIADs to respond to one an-
other could be exploited to create a unified entity, similar to
crowd behaviour. The result would be an immersive sound-
scape, reminiscent of a taunting mob, effected through looped
chants intertwined with indeterminate maniacal laughter
where the audience are the perpetrators of the event.
5 IMPLEMENTATION
All the audio used in the work was obtained from online
samples. The Bible narration was obtained through a public
domain audio Bible [ 1], while other samples were obtained
from freesound.org (a full listing of the samples is provided
in the acknowledgements section of this paper). The samples
were edited to facilitate appropriate playback lengths and
looping, grouped in folders and then uploaded for storage
on each device’s SD card. HappyBrackets was modified to
facilitate transferring complete folders of audio files to mul-
tiple devices without having to remove SD cards or select
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
383TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia Angelo Fraietta
individual devices. Similarly, the DIADs were programmed
by sending pre-compiled Java bytecode sketches to all the de-
vices simultaneously. There were effectively three classes of
actor in the work—Christ, interactive soldiers or guards, and
the remaining cohort—each exhibiting different behaviour.
Although there were effectively three device classes, the de-
vices were only different in their physical form factor and
a unique identifier based upon their MAC addresses of the
network cards. Unlike many other embedded programming
environments, such as Arduino, HappyBrackets facilitates
running concurrent multiple sketches on each device [ 38].
This feature was used both during the composition stage
on the virtual device simulator and on the physical DIADs
during performance; however, the function and technique
was used differently. During composition, the feature was
used to simulate multiple devices through layering, while in
the DIADs, it was used as a selectable code bank.
Composition and Debugging
It is often convenient to simulate embedded devices on the
computer used for composition rather than uploading code
to the embedded device. The device simulator in Happy-
Brackets facilitates simulation of sensor devices, such as
accelerometers and gyroscopes, by using sliders [ 38]. This
would reduce the requirement to upload code to the DIAD
and physically roll it when performing some tests. Moreover,
this reduced the number of times the composer would need
to recharge batteries on each of the devices during the com-
position stage. Although HappyBrackets does not enable one
to run more than one virtual device of the Computer, it is
possible to simulate multiple devices by layering sketches on
top of one another. For example, it is possible to simulate two
instances of guard balls by sending the same sketch twice.
Likewise, it is possible to add the ten cohort sketches by
sending the cohort sketch ten times. This enabled one to test
how all the sketches interacted with one another without
having to run multiple devices.
Figure 2: Device and Sketch ControlScope.Simulating the three balls would require three sets of gy-
roscopes, however, the virtual device simulator only has one
set of gyroscope controls. It is possible, however, to simulate
these as separate controls for each device by using the gyro-
scope average values through a SketchScope DynamicControl.
DynamicControls in HappyBrackets, "which although orig-
inally envisaged to transmit variable values to a graphical
display ..., became the mechanism whereby data could be eas-
ily communicated amongst compositions on the same device
and to other devices on the network" [ 38]. The ControlScope
of a DynamicControl dictates how far the data is logically
transmitted from one control to another. Sensor simulator
controls would have a DeviceScope, in that the values are
transmitted to all sketches on the device. The SketchScope
control only transmits its value to other DynamicControls
in that same sketch. This effectively enables one to individ-
ually simulate an independent IMU for each sketch on the
virtual device by connecting the DeviceScope control to the
SketchScope control, shown in Figure 2.
The multiple concurrent sketch feature was used to pro-
vide all device class behaviours to each DIAD, and have the
DIAD ignore functionality or behaviour not relevant to that
class. Device hostnames were automatically derived from
the MAC address, which were then mapped to functional-
ity. Each device, therefore, was able to know how it was to
behave based upon the assignment and mapping.
The composition was realised as a state machine where
all the devices behaved according to the current global state
of the performance, and the functionality assigned to the
sketch class. For example, the IMU in the guard balls, shown
in Figure 3, was only mapped during performance states two
to five, while the IMU in the cohort devices were not mapped
in any of the performance states. The function of the devices
Figure 3: Internal Structure of guard Ball DIADs.
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
384Transient Relics TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
in each of the performance states is listed below.
(1)The participants roll the balls, however, it is the Christ
ball that triggers entry into this state. The initial narra-
tion of the passage of scripture up to the words "Hail,
King of the Jews!" is played through the Christ ball.
(2)The two guard balls start playing a loop chant of "Hail,
King of the Jews!" After two loops, the cohort are grad-
ually introduced into chanting by the guard devices
sending messages to randomly selected devices.
(3)The cohort devices call out the "Hail" message, how-
ever, a random playback rate is used, affecting pitch
and duration. Each cohort DIAD choose a different
playback rate every three seconds. The participants in-
teract with all three balls, however, it is only the guard
balls that are actively responding to participant ma-
nipulation. This state completes when the guards have
been sufficiently moved. This state continues until the
participants have sufficiently rolled the guards.
(4)The cohort start to chant in a loop with the playback
rate returning to normal, creating a unified chant from
the entire DIAD cohort. Participants rolling a guard
ball causes the playback rate of that ball to change
dependant upon the speed of rolling the ball. If the ball
is not rolled, the pitch of the sample played by guard
is normal, otherwise the playback rate of the guard
follows the movement speed. This state continues until
the participants have sufficiently rolled the guards.
(5)Participants rolling the guards will cause the cohort
devices to increase their playback rate. The function
is accumulative in that if the user stops rolling, the
pitch of the cohort stops increasing until the ball is
moved again. The entire cohort pitch and loop speed
increases, building into a frenzied climax.
(6)All devices stop playing and after a short silence, the
Christ ball narrates the remainder of the passage. When
the narration completes, the composition moves to the
next state.
(7)All the cohort commence playing random maniacal
laughing. This state continues until the Christ ball is
rolled.
(8)The cohort continue laughing while the guard balls
play a "laughing sailor" sound reminiscent of the penny
arcade slot machines [ 23] and provides a particularly
sinister ambience. When the participants leave, the
balls are placed at the starting position and the state
is manually set back to the start.
6 EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE
The author made various observations during the exhibition
with respect to artistic intention, technical functionality of
the equipment and participant behaviour in the context ofa virtual pilgrimage. The work was assessed as to whether
it met the original artistic and technical goals, with a view
to discovering where the artist’s expectations of mapping
metaphors did not match the actual realisation of the work
with a view of making appropriate modifications in future
performances.
Before arriving at this installation, the audience had been
led in small groups through four previous stations that of-
fered no interaction. The pilgrims were led by the event
facilitators to a bounded outside area with three balls at the
entrance, with the remaining DIADs inconspicuously posi-
tioned around the perimeter. The participants only had the
scripture reference in the program and a paragraph briefly
describing the work. The participants then started rolling
the balls around the area, as shown in Figure 4, while the
DIADs responded to the movements of the balls. When the
performance state had reached the end, the balls were re-
turned back to the start in preparation to the next group.
Each performance generally lasted about five minutes, with
the whole event lasting ninety minutes.
Figure 4: Performance at Newcastle Train Station.
Technical Evaluation
Technical success was based on whether the physical de-
vices, coupled with the HappyBrackets environment, func-
tioned as intended without considering the artistic context
of the composition. These features would determine whether
the system could function suitably for works with similar
technical or physical requirements. The areas of evaluation
included:
•ease of configuring devices,
•the ability to modify the work at the actual venue,
•reliability of network communication between devices,
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
385TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia Angelo Fraietta
Table 1: DIAD battery usage
DIAD type Pi TypeCapacity
(mAh)Duration (min.)
Large Ball (Christ) Pi 2 3100 > 90
Medium Ball (guard) Pi3 2600 20 to > 90
Poi (cohort) Pi Zero 2000 5 to > 90
Single Speaker (cohort) Pi Zero 2000 > 90
•reliability of hardware, including power sufficiency,
and
•suitability of the audio generation in the environment.
Two key features of the HappyBrackets system were the abil-
ity to program and configure multiple remote devices, and
the facility to modify and send rapid code changes during per-
formance at the venue [ 16]. Moreover, the new facility added
by the HappyBrackets developers to send entire folders of
audio files to multiple devices was particularly useful. There
were no failures in the local area network and all devices
were able to intercommunicate over the IoT infrastructure
without issue.
The duration that devices could potentially run are listed
in Table 1, showing DIAD function, Raspberry Pi type, bat-
tery capacity, and how long the DIAD ran. There were var-
ious factors that influenced the results, including the type
of Raspberry Pi, battery capacity, the number of speakers
on the DIAD, and battery wear. The devices were tested by
playing audio through them constantly for only up to ninety
minutes. This limit was made to avoid completely discharg-
ing the batteries, which would cause damage to the internal
cell structure and severely reducing its lifespan[ 82]. It was
determined that if a battery could deliver power to the DIAD
for the full ninety minutes while constantly playing sound,
then it would logically tolerate the same period of time with
sections of silence at the actual performance. The Large ball
used a 12V, 3100mAh sealed lead acid battery and played a
very minimal amount of audio, and consequently, was ex-
pected to meet power requirement for the full duration of
the performance with no risk of power failure. There were
large discrepancies with the batteries for the poi devices and
the medium balls due to battery wear. Battery wear, which
results in the reduction of capacity, is generally caused by
"the effects of cycling history, ageing, and storage and envi-
ronmental conditions" [ 2, p. 678-679]. This appeared to be
a significant factor with reliability the medium balls. They
had been specifically designed to suit a particular 5V LiPo
battery model, however, those batteries were no longer avail-
able for purchase. The batteries on hand were more than two
years old and had been recharged a significant number of
times. Consequently, there was a significant variation in theduration that each battery could power the DIAD, ranging
from twenty minutes through to more than ninety minutes.
These were tested a few days before the performance, and
only batteries that lasted more than an hour in the studio
were selected. The two best ones were placed in the devices
while the others remained in a USB charger during the per-
formance in case a battery swap was required. There was
another significant issue with these particular DIADs in
they used a short USB cable between the battery and the Pi.
When people dropped or threw the balls, this would cause
a momentary loss of continuity through the USB connec-
tor and cause the Pi to lose power. Moreover, dropping the
balls would sometimes cause a ball to separate in half due
to the construction. These two issue were considered major
problems during the performance, primarily because this
was one of the balls used for participant interaction. It was,
however, very easy to immediately see that the device had
failed during the performance through the HappyBrackets
device monitoring system, which in a sense was a positive
result for the monitoring mechanism. These problems could
be reduced in these balls by using soldered tabs or locking
connectors for power instead of USB, and by implementing
some sort of locking to prevent inadvertent separation of the
device.
Of the three poi DIADs, only one was suitable for use in
the performance due to battery failure, with only one out of
the three devices lasting more than ten minutes. The author
suspects this is due to poor battery care as these devices had
previously been used for workshops over the previous six
months and had often been left discharged. Investigation
into exactly why these specific DIADs failed has not yet
been undertaken. The suitability of the audio within the
environment was not satisfactory. First, the volume of sound
from the large ball DIAD that produced the narrated text was
completely insufficient. Unlike the medium DIADs, shown in
Figure 3 with internal speaker housing, the large ball DIAD
did not have any sort of housing. Consequently, a significant
amount of sound was absorbed inside the DIAD. Second, a
significant amount of sound from the surrounding DIADs
was lost due to the amount of open space between the sound
source and the listener. These problems would have been
reduced if the performance area was made smaller.
Artistic Evaluation
Barthes notes in the context of literary art that "a text is
not a line of words releasing a single ‘theological’ meaning
(the ‘message’ of the Author-God) but a multi-dimensional
space in which a variety of writings, none of them original,
blend and clash" [ 10, p. 146]. This is also the case in this
work, where the author’s intended meaning for the use of
balls, chanting and laughter would be different to those of
the audience. The author did not interfere with or probe
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
386Transient Relics TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
the participants as to what they thought about the work
for ethical reasons, but instead, made himself available for
discussion at the pilgrims’ initiation. The conclusions drawn,
therefore, are not objective; but instead, the author’s own
subjective evaluation of concept to implementation mapping
and effectiveness and whether the participants appeared
to make these connections. Each mapping coupled with its
effectiveness is listed below.
Balls for interaction—Invoke Play— Highly effective.
The concept of using a ball to signify playing a game was
extremely accurate and effective. Upon seeing the balls, most
people, including young children, immediately started play-
ing with them. Some were kicking or tossing them, while at
other times young toddlers ran to play with them. There were
a few people, however, that just waited to see what would
happen, while others explored how their ball manipulation
affected the soundscape.
Pitch shift from ball—Interactive feedback—Ineffective.
The audio effects caused by rolling the balls were very inef-
fective. Although most of the participants were completely
immersed in playing with the balls, and consequently, ap-
peared oblivious to how their manipulation of a ball was
affecting the sound it produced; those that did try to explore
ball manipulation to sound modification found it difficult to
correlate the two. A major reason was that participants often
rolled the balls at speeds that the composer was not expect-
ing, generating pitch changes often higher than originally
intended, and consequently, failed to produce the desired
effect. Furthermore, people often rolled the larger Christ ball
to no effect because it was only programmed to function in
two of the eight states. Consequently, this detracted from
the experience, particularly because one would expect the
largest ball to produce the greatest effect on the performance.
Sequential state changes—Create timeline—Ineffective.
Very few participants appeared to be aware of the change of
state in the work due to the chaotic nature of the DIAD mul-
tiplicity early in the piece. The random pitch shifted "Hail,
King of the Jews!" samples were synchronised into a unified
chant in state five. When the participants continued rolling
the balls, these chants were pitch shifted too quickly, causing
this state to complete before they could sufficiently experi-
ence the united chant. Finally, the audience were unaware
that the piece was finished in the final state as the devices
were still generating laughter.
Chanting—Crowd simulation—Highly effective. Many
participants and observers noted to the author that the laugh-
ter created by the cohort was very effective in creating an
atmosphere of a taunting mob. The use maniacal laughter
was particularly effective, with the sounds triggering laugh-
ter from some observers, while others stated that they found
those sounds "creepy" and disturbing, with one pilgrim stat-
ing it was "like something from a horror movie."Narration—Provide vocal context—Ineffective. The nar-
ration in the piece was not particularly effective. In the be-
ginning of the work, participants were trying to cause an
effect by rolling the guard balls,which was not programmed
until state two. The introductory narration was too long as
participants wanted to create effects at the very beginning
of the piece and did not actually listen to the narration. The
narration in state six was effective only in that it provided a
segue between the chanting and the laughing.
Although the main abstractions were effective, the work
requires significant modifications to effectively engage par-
ticipants in their Stations of the Cross pilgrimage. Moreover,
the work should be an item that facilitates the pilgrims’ con-
templation of the passion event rather than a showcase of
technical possibilities.
Reworking the Station
Although some modifications required to the installation
were technical, these alterations are reasonably straightfor-
ward and noted in Section 6. Modifying the work composi-
tionally, however, would required an alternate method of sim-
ulating audience interaction with the balls during the compo-
sition phase. Furthermore, the form of the work needs to be
restructured so that techniques that were effective—such as
play, chanting and laughter—are enhanced as the work pro-
gresses. Likewise, techniques that were not effective—such
as pitch shift and narration—are removed or restricted.
Manipulating sliders in the simulator was very ineffective
for this composition except for the simplest of interactions,
such as detecting the initial rolling of a ball or creating an
effect based on the speed of rolling. Also, although one could
simulate multiple DIAD balls with layered sketches and sepa-
rate sliders, it was not possible to move more than one slider
at a time with the mouse. A more effective mechanism for
simulating participant manipulation of the balls is by log-
ging IMU data of people actually playing with the balls and
storing this data on the device SD card. This data can be
transferred from the DIADs into the simulator, and played
back during composition phases. Moreover, using multiple
layered sketches and logs would allow concurrent simulation
of a collection of balls. Synchronising the logging process
with a video recording would facilitate correlating IMU data
with observed play, providing more detailed compositional
stimulus. This technique was applied to a later unrelated
project where multiple roller skaters carrying DIADs inside
backpacks performed a work in a skate park, where skater
movement was logged and used as compositional stimulus
[47].
Although the previous implementation did not require a
central server, the progression of the piece was based on a
global fixed machine state. A more effective solution could
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
387TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia Angelo Fraietta
be to reduce the work to three main states—chanting, laugh-
ing and silence. Rather than fixed logic, the composer could
use fuzzy logic control [ 30], whereby each DIAD would be
influence by what the other DIADs are doing, similar to
actual crowd behaviour [ 20]. Each DIAD would be able to
determine how many other DIADs are chanting or laughing,
and coupled with ball movement, make a calculation to de-
termine whether it will chant, laugh or be silent. Reducing
the number of changes pilgrims would experience during
the piece could allow more time to contemplate how each
metaphor reflects the recorded historical event.
The ineffective segments of narration should be removed
as they are more suited to a Passion play dramatisation [ 81].
Instead, Bible passage and visual images could be provided
on large cards scattered in the area, enabling the participant
to revert to the scripture during the station, facilitating con-
templation in their own time. Coupling these with the "Hail,
King of the Jews!" chant would definitively contextualise the
work as the Taunting of Christ. Reforming the work would in
this manner would better facilitate mapping of each concept
to the specific aspect of the Passion event.
7 CONCLUSION
This paper described how multiple DIADs were used as a mul-
tiplicity to create an interactive responsive environment that
functioned as a virtual transient relic. It examined the con-
cept of pilgrimage and relics, and how relic related behaviour
is similar between religious and secular people. Moreover,
observations were made regarding the treatment of objects
as substitutes or icons and their treatment as actual relics.
Sounds were presented as being emotionally powerful, and
the ability to embody them temporarily and instantaneously
can be effected where the sound contains culturally poten-
tially sensitive material, with some cultures prohibiting the
playback of voices of deceased persons. The concept of the
Stations of the Cross was presented as a virtual pilgrimage.
The original pilgrimage entailed walking the physical road
in Jerusalem and pausing at physical places (type B relics),
and replaced by a virtual sojourn where pilgrims pause at
substitutions by way of iconic representations (class C relics).
The artwork attempted to abstract certain aspects of human
behaviour inferred in the passion event—specifically play,
humiliation, and mobs— through the use of balls, laughter
and chanting. Specific DIAD attributes were mapped to so-
cial and behavioural practices. First, the tangible nature of
DIADs was mapped to the concept of play through the use of
a ball coupled with the concept of culpability. Next, the per-
ception of a mob was effected through spatially positioned
DIADs chanting together. The notion of humiliation was
effected through the use of maniacal laughter. Finally, the
concept of defining the work to a specific time in history was
effected through the use of a unique and definitive phrase.Developing and performing the artwork was used as a
medium to evaluate the reliability of the HappyBrackets
creative coding platform coupled with various DIAD con-
figurations in a networked installation—from composition,
simulation in the studio, through to live code modifications
at the actual event. This provided valuable feedback with
respect to the stability of the system as a whole, and how
long one can expect various DIAD configurations to last
in various environments, such as classrooms, workshops,
live performances or unsupervised installations. In particu-
lar, layering of sketches and the uses of different Dynamic
Control scopes facilitated effective simulation of multiple
physical devices within a single virtual simulator device.
Finally, the aesthetics of the performance was analysed to
determine whether it met the set artistic goals and metaphor-
ical mappings, and what changes are required to make it
an effective tool—a temporal, transient relic—to facilitate
meditative contemplation. Methods for developing realistic
simulations of how participants may use the balls in the piece
were defined, while the composition of the work was substan-
tially reduced and refined, removing ineffective structures
while enhancing features that worked well.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Public domain audio narration obtained from World English
Bible: New Testament: https://ia800907.us.archive.org/16/
items/web_new_testament_0811_librivox1/worldenglishbible2_
10_mark.mp3
Samples for loops were obtained from the following sources:
•laughing-sailor.mp3 by davidpalmer: https://freesound.
org/s/52547/
•Evil Laughs by Audionautics: https://freesound.org/s/
171656/
•sage_ laughing_ l053112.wav by sagetyrtle: https://
freesound.org/s/156951/
•EvilLaugh.wav by tekgnosis: https://freesound.org/s/
145469/
•Evil Laugh by Fabrizio84: https://freesound.org/s/457971/
•Creepy Laughing by SnowblindSoundDepot: https://
freesound.org/s/464245/
•Man laughs extensively (stuxer).mp3 by stuxer: https:
//freesound.org/s/401214/
•Laughing by NSDAP: https://freesound.org/s/393353/
Aspects of this research were funded by Inspiring Aus-
tralia, the Australian Government’s national strategy for
public engagement with the science technology and inno-
vation and develops influential networks that connect sci-
ence and engineering researchers to big audiences. https:
//inspiringnsw.org.au/
This research acknowledges the support of the University
of New South Wales Art and Design, the Interactive Media
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
388Transient Relics TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Lab Research Infrastructure Scheme Supporting Collabora-
tive Research RG163110. Photo credits ©2019 Angelo Fraietta.
Author’s ORCID number: 0000-0002-3171-8491.
REFERENCES
[1]2008. World English Bible: New Testament. Retrieved July 26, 2019
from https://archive.org/details/web_new_testament_0811_librivox1
[2]Analiza Abdilla, Arthur Richards, and Stephen Burrow. 2015. Power
and endurance modelling of battery-powered rotorcraft. In 2015
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). IEEE, 675–680.
[3]Ida Madieha Abdul Ghani Azmi. 2017. Voices from the dead: the uneasy
case of indigenous cultural expression. International Journal of Law
and Management 59, 4 (2017), 522–533.
[4]Richard D. Alexander. 1986. Ostracism and indirect reciprocity: The
reproductive significance of humor. Ethology and Sociobiology 7, 3
(1986), 253 – 270. https://doi.org/10.1016/0162-3095(86)90052-X
[5]George Cyprian Alston. 1912. Way of the Cross. The Catholic Encyclope-
dia15 (1912), 569–571. http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/15569a.htm
Accessed: 2019-06-18.
[6]Alissa N. Antle, Min Fan, and Emily S. Cramer. 2015. PhonoBlocks: A
Tangible System for Supporting Dyslexic Children Learning to Read. In
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded,
and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 533–538.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2677199.2687897
[7]Gary Armstrong and Malcolm Young. 1999. Fanatical football
chants: Creating and controlling the carnival. Culture, Sport, Soci-
ety2, 3 (1999), 173–211. https://doi.org/10.1080/14610989908721852
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/14610989908721852
[8]Saskia Bakker, Alissa N. Antle, and Elise Van Den Hoven. 2012. Em-
bodied Metaphors in Tangible Interaction Design. Personal Ubiquitous
Comput. 16, 4 (April 2012), 433–449. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-
011-0410-4
[9]Connie Barlow. 2009. Pilgrimage to Down House, the Home of Charles
Darwin Sacred Site of the Epic of Evolution. http://www.thegreatstory.
org/downhouse.html. Accessed: 2019-06-18.
[10] Roland Barthes. 1977. The death of the author (S. Heath, Trans.). Image,
music, text (1977), 142–148.
[11] Jane Batkin et al .2016. Rethinking the rabbit: revolution, identity and
connection in Looney Tunes. Animation Studies Online Journal 11
(2016).
[12] Toni Bauman and Dermot Smyth. 2007. Indigenous partnerships in
protected area management in Australia: three case studies. Australian
Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies Canberra.
[13] Alex Bean, Sabina Siddiqi, Anila Chowdhury, Billy Whited, Orit Shaer,
and Robert J. K Jacob. 2008. Marble Track Audio Manipulator (MTAM):
A Tangible User Interface for Audio Composition. In Proceedings of
the 2Nd International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction
(TEI ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 27–30. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1347390.1347398
[14] Holy Bible. 1984. New international version. Grand Rapids: Zondervan
(1984).
[15] Oliver Bown and Sam Ferguson. 2016. A Musical Game of Bowls
Using the DIADs. In Proceedings of the International Conference on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression. 371–372.
[16] Oliver Bown, Angelo Fraietta, Sam Ferguson, Lian Loke, and Liam
Bray. 2019. Facilitating Creative Exploratory Search with Multiple
Networked Audio Devices Using HappyBrackets. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression,
Marcelo Queiroz and Anna Xambó Sedó (Eds.). UFRGS, Porto Alegre,
Brazil, 286–291. http://www.nime.org/proceedings/2019/nime2019_paper055.pdf
[17] Oliver Bown, Angelo Fraietta, Adrian Lim-Klumpes, Peter Hollo,
Evan Dorrian, and Shoeb Ahmad. 2019. Spiral. Mechanical musi-
cal instruments, custom audio devices, augmented reality. https:
//sydneydesign.com.au/2019/event/spiral/
[18] Oliver Bown, Lian Loke, Sameul Ferguson, and Dagmar Reinhardt.
2015. Distributed Interactive Audio Devices: Creative strategies and
audience responses to novel musical interaction scenarios. In Interna-
tional Symposium on Electronic Art. ISEA, 604–607.
[19] O Bown, L Loke, A Fraietta, L Bray, S Ferguson, and K Packham. 2018.
So Predictable!? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_wZrVDUnoVE
Performed at 2018 conference on New Instruments for Musical Expres-
sion (NIME 2018) on 4 June 2018.
[20] John M Brindley. 1982. Disruptive Behaviour–A Psychological Per-
spective. The Police Journal 55, 1 (1982), 28–38.
[21] Carmen Acevedo Butcher. 2013. Walking the Walk (of the Stations of
the Cross). Christian Reflection: A Series in Faith and Ethics (January
2013), 55–64.
[22] Sarah Cascone. 2018. New York’s Citywide ’Stations of the Cross’
Exhibition Highlights Global Injustices Through the Story of Christ.
Retrieved June 15, 2019 from https://news.artnet.com/exhibitions/new-
york-stations-cross-art-1256954
[23] Anya Chapman and Duncan Light. 2011. The ’heritagisation’ of the
British seaside resort: the rise of the ’old penny arcade’. Journal of Her-
itage Tourism 6, 3 (2011), 209–226. https://doi.org/10.1080/1743873X.
2011.592276 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/1743873X.2011.592276
[24] Perry Cook. 2017. 2001: Principles for Designing Computer Music
Controllers. In A NIME Reader. Springer, New York, NY, USA, 1–13.
[25] Matthew Dillon. 1991. Tragic Laughter. The Classical World 84, 5
(1991), 345–355. http://www.jstor.org/stable/4350851
[26] KAYLEIGH DRAY. 2015. Remembering 9/11: The final messages sent
by victims of the Twin Towers attack. Retrieved July 30, 2019
from https://closeronline.co.uk/real-life/news/remembering-911-final-
messages-sent-victims-twin-towers-attack/
[27] Jill Dubisch. 1996. Anthropology as Pilgrimage. Etnofoor 9, 2 (1996),
66–77. http://www.jstor.org/stable/25757893
[28] 4th/5th cent Egeria and George E Gingras. 1970. Egeria diary of a
pilgrimage. Newman Press, NY, USA. http://openlibrary.org/books/
OL23766295M Includes bibliographical references.
[29] Ludwig Eidelberg. 1959. Humiliation in masochism. Journal of the
American Psychoanalytic Association 7, 2 (1959), 274–283.
[30] Zoltan Erdei and Paul Borlan. 2011. Fuzzy logic control. Carpathian
Journal of Electrical Engineering 5, 1 (2011), 35–40.
[31] Craig A Evans. 2000. Mark’s incipit and the Priene calendar inscription:
From Jewish gospel to Greco-Roman gospel. Journal of Greco-Roman
Christianity and Judaism 1, 2000 (2000), 67–81.
[32] Min Fan and Alissa N. Antle. 2015. Tactile Letters: A Tangible Tabletop
with Texture Cues Supporting Alphabetic Learning for Dyslexic Chil-
dren. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’15). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 673–678. https://doi.org/10.1145/2677199.2688806
[33] Mark T Finney. 2013. Servile Supplicium: Shame and the Deuteronomic
Curse–Crucifixion in Its Cultural Context. Biblical Theology Bulletin
43, 3 (2013), 124–134.
[34] Angelo Fraietta. 2019. Coding a virtual spacecraft in HappyBrackets–
Sydney. Retrieved October 25, 2019 from https://www.scienceweek.
net.au/coding-a-virtual-spacecraft-in-happybrackets-sydney/
[35] Angelo Fraietta. 2019. Mark 15:16-19. Tangible and interactive sound-
scape.
[36] Angelo Fraietta. 2019. Stellar Command: a planetarium software
based cosmic performance interface. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, Marcelo Queiroz
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
389TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia Angelo Fraietta
and Anna Xambó Sedó (Eds.). UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 387–392.
http://www.nime.org/proceedings/2019/nime2019_paper075.pdf
[37] Angelo Fraietta and Oliver Bown. 2019. Creating a Sonified Spacecraft
game using HappyBrackets and Stellarium. In Proceedings of the 17th
Linux Audio Conference (LAC-19). CCRMA, Stanford University, USA,
1–7.
[38] Angelo Fraietta, Oliver Bown, Samuel Ferguson, Sam Gillespie, and
Lia Bray. 2020. Rapid Composition for Networked Devices with Hap-
pyBrackets. Computer Music Journal 43, 2 (2020), forthcoming. To
appear.
[39] F Ho-Ching, Jennifer Mankoff, and James A Landay. 2003. Can you see
what I hear?: the design and evaluation of a peripheral sound display
for the deaf. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors
in computing systems. ACM, 161–168.
[40] Steven Hooper. 2014. A cross-cultural theory of relics: on under-
standing religion, bodies, artefacts, images and art. World Art 4,
2 (2014), 175–207. https://doi.org/10.1080/21500894.2014.935873
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/21500894.2014.935873
[41] Toshiaki Iwai, Toshimitsu Asakura, Tom Ifukube, and Toshio
Kawashima. 1986. Reproduction of sound from old wax phonograph
cylinders using the laser-beam reflection method. Applied optics 25, 5
(1986), 597–604.
[42] Michael Jacklin. 2005. Collaboration and closure: Negotiating Indige-
nous mourning protocols in Australian life writing. Antipodes 19, 2
(2005), 184–191.
[43] Victoria Emily Jones. 2018. Stations of the Cross at the SAAM.
Retrieved 15 June 2019 from https://artandtheology.org/2018/02/11/
saamstations/
[44] Sergi Jordà, Günter Geiger, Marcos Alonso, and Martin Kaltenbrunner.
2007. The reacTable: Exploring the Synergy Between Live Music
Performance and Tabletop Tangible Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 1st
International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction (TEI ’07).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 139–146. https://doi.org/10.1145/1226969.
1226998
[45] Steven A Kohm. 2009. Naming, shaming and criminal justice: Mass-
mediated humiliation as entertainment and punishment. Crime, Media,
Culture 5, 2 (2009), 188–205.
[46] Lian Loke, Oliver Bown, Samuel Ferguson, Liam Bray, Angelo Fraietta,
and Kirsten Packham. 2018. Your move sounds so predictable!. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Inter-
action in Play (CHI PLAY 2018) Companion Extended Abstracts. ACM,
121–125.
[47] L Loke, A Fraietta, P Crawley, A Winston, and M Leete. 2019. Sonic
Sk8er. Performance. TBP.
[48] James Macdonald. 2016. Tracing the passion of a black Christ: critical
reflections on the iconographic revision and symbolic redeployment of the
Stations of the Cross and Passion cycle by South African artists Sydney
Kumalo, Sokhaya Charles Nkosi and Azaria Mbatha. Ph.D. Dissertation.
University of Cape Town.
[49] Ian Mackenzie and Wim van der Wurff. 2012. Relic syntax in Middle
English and Medieval Spanish: parameter interaction in language
change. Language 88, 4 (2012), 846–876.
[50] Peter A Maresco. 2004. Mel Gibson’s The Passion of the Christ: Market
segmentation, mass marketing and promotion, and the Internet. The
Journal of Religion and Popular Culture 8, 1 (2004), 2–2.
[51] Peter Jan Margry. 2008. Secular pilgrimage: a contradiction in terms?
Shrines and Pilgrimage in the Modern World. New itineraries into the
sacred (2008).
[52] Piero Marini. 2011. The Way of the Cross. Retrieved July 9, 2019
from http://www.vatican.va/news_services/liturgy/documents/index_
via-crucis_en.html
[53] Sallie McFague. 1975. Speaking in parables: A study in metaphor and
theology. Number s 78. Fortress Press Philadelphia.[54] Megan McKenna. 2003. The New Stations of the Cross: The Way of the
Cross According to Scripture. Image Books, New York.
[55] Eduardo Reck Miranda and Marcelo M Wanderley. 2006. New digital
musical instruments: control and interaction beyond the keyboard. Vol. 21.
AR Editions, Inc., Middleton, WI, USA.
[56] Mark C. Mitchell and Oliver Bown. 2013. Towards a Creativity Support
Tool in Processing: Understanding the Needs of Creative Coders. In Pro-
ceedings of the 25th Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference:
Augmentation, Application, Innovation, Collaboration (OzCHI ’13). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 143–146. https://doi.org/10.1145/2541016.2541096
[57] Joel Morkan. 1972. Wrath and Laughter: Milton’s Ideas on Satire.
Studies in Philology 69, 4 (1972), 475–495. http://www.jstor.org/stable/
4173780
[58] Suranga Nanayakkara, Elizabeth Taylor, Lonce Wyse, and S H Ong.
2009. An enhanced musical experience for the deaf: design and evalua-
tion of a music display and a haptic chair. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 337–346.
[59] Josélia Neves. 2010. Music to my eyes... Conveying music in subti-
tling for the deaf and the hard of hearing. Perspectives in Audiovisual
Translation, Lódz Studies in Language 20 (2010), 123–145.
[60] Robert Ousterhout. 2003. Architecture as relic and the construction
of sanctity: the stones of the Holy Sepulchre. Journal of the Society of
Architectural Historians 62, 1 (2003), 4–23.
[61] Garth Paine. 2004. Endangered sounds: silence as sonic exploration.
SonicDifference: Re-Sounding the World: Biennale of Electronic Arts, Perth
(BEAP04), held in September, 2004 (2004).
[62] Esben Warming Pedersen and Kasper Hornbæk. 2009. mixiTUI: A
Tangible Sequencer for Electronic Live Performances. In Proceedings of
the 3rd International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction
(TEI ’09). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 223–230. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1517664.1517713
[63] Thomas O Pelzel. 1976. The San Gabriel Stations of the Cross from an
Art-Historical Perspective. The Journal of California Anthropology 3, 1
(1976).
[64] Charles Pollock. 1942. Stations of the Cross at the SAAM. Retrieved 15
June 2019 from https://americanart.si.edu/artwork/look-down-road-
19797
[65] Sara Price. 2008. A Representation Approach to Conceptualizing Tan-
gible Learning Environments. In Proceedings of the 2Nd International
Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction (TEI ’08). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 151–158. https://doi.org/10.1145/1347390.1347425
[66] Ilaria Ramelli. 2013. Constantine, the Legal Recognition of Christianity
and its Antecedents. Anuario de Historia de la Iglesia 22 (2013), 65–82.
[67] Claudia Maria Riehl. 2015. Language attrition, language contact and
the concept of relic variety: the case of Barossa German. International
Journal of the Sociology of Language 2015, 236 (2015), 261–293.
[68] Francis Rumsey and Tim McCormick. 2012. Sound and recording: an
introduction. Routledge.
[69] Christopher Salamone. 2017. "The Fragments, Scraps, the Bits and
Greasy Relics": Shakespeare and the Eighteenth-Century Poetic Mis-
cellany. Eighteenth-Century Life 41, 1 (2017), 7–31.
[70] Lisa Saltzman. 2005. Gerhard Richter’s Stations of the Cross: On
Martyrdom and Memory in Postwar German Art. Oxford Art Journal
28, 1 (2005), 25–44.
[71] Bert Schiettecatte and Jean Vanderdonckt. 2008. AudioCubes: A Dis-
tributed Cube Tangible Interface Based on Interaction Range for Sound
Design. In Proceedings of the 2Nd International Conference on Tangible
and Embedded Interaction (TEI ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3–10.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1347390.1347394
[72] Raymond J. Seeger. 1964. Galileo Pilgrimage. American Journal
of Physics 32, 3 (1964), 181–196. https://doi.org/10.1119/1.1970169
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
390Transient Relics TEI’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1119/1.1970169
[73] Jon L. Seydl. 2003. The Sacred Heart of Jesus: Art and
religion in eighteenth-century Italy. Ph.D. Dissertation.
https://search-proquest-com.wwwproxy1.library.unsw.edu.au/
docview/305306127?accountid=12763
[74] Susan D Shantz. 1985. The stations of the cross: A calculated trap?
Master’s thesis. Religion & Culture / Religious Studies, Faculty of
Arts.
[75] Shane Simpson and Jules Munro. 2012. Music Business: A musician’s
guide to the Australian music industry (4th. ed.). Omnibus Press, Lon-
don.
[76] Sophie Skach, Anna Xambó, Luca Turchet, Ariane Stolfi, Rebecca
Stewart, and Mathieu Barthet. 2018. Embodied interactions with e-
textiles and the internet of sounds for performing arts. In Proceedings
of the Twelfth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and
Embodied Interaction. ACM, 80–87.
[77] Dirk H.R. Spennemann. 2004. The ethics of treading on Neil Arm-
strong’s footprints. Space Policy 20, 4 (2004), 279 – 290. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.spacepol.2004.08.005
[78] David Suisman. 2010. Sound, Knowledge, and the “Immanence of Hu-
man Failure” Rethinking Musical Mechanization through the Phono-
graph, the Player-Piano, and the Piano. Social Text 28, 1 (102) (2010),13–34.
[79] David Szondy. 2019. Apollo 11: Fifty years since that One Small
Step. Retrieved July 30, 2019 from https://newatlas.com/apollo-11-
anniversary/59993/
[80] Herbert Thurston. 1906. The Stations of the Cross: An Account of Their
History and Devotional Purpose. Burns & Oates.
[81] Richard C Trexler. 2003. Reliving Golgotha: The Passion Play of Izta-
palapa. Harvard University Press.
[82] Jens Vetter, Petr Novák, Markus R Wagner, Clemens Veit, K.
Moeller, J. O. Besenhard, Martin Winter, Margret Wohlfahrt-Mehrens,
Christoph Vogler, and Abderrezak Hammouche. 2005. Ageing mecha-
nisms in lithium-ion batteries. Journal of power sources 147, 1-2 (2005),
269–281.
[83] Jeremy Waldron. 1995. On Humiliation. , 1787–1804 pages. http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/1289904
[84] Peter K Yu. 2008. Cultural relics, intellectual property, and intangible
heritage. Temp. L. Rev. 81 (2008), 433.
[85] Julie Zauzmer. 2017. Walking Jesus’ walk, with a modern twist
this Easter season. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/acts-of-
faith/wp/2017/04/15/walking-jesus-walk-with-a-modern-twist-this-
easter-season/?noredirect=on&utm_term=.5f61246b202f. Accessed:
2019-06-18.
Papers Session 5: Reflection and Rituals
 
TEI ’20, February 9–12, 2020, Sydney, NSW, Australia
391