Engaging with Mobile Music Retrieval
Daniel Boland
daniel@dcs.gla.ac.ukRoss McLachlan
r.mclachlan.1@research.gla.ac.ukRoderick Murray-Smith
roderick.murray-
smith@glasgow.ac.uk
School of Computing Science
University of Glasgow, United Kingdom
ABSTRACT
This paper contributes novel measures of user engagement 
in mobile music retrieval, linking these to work in music 
psychology, and illustrating resulting design guidelines  in a 
demonstrator system. The large music collections available 
to users today can be overwhelming in mobile settings, they 
offer ‘too-much-choice’ to users, who often resort to shufﬂe-
based playback. Work in music psychology has introduced 
the concept of music engagement – listeners vary in their 
desired control over their music listening, and engagement 
varies with listening context. We develop a series of metrics 
to capture music listening behaviour from users’ interaction 
logs. In a survey of 94 music listeners, we show signiﬁcant 
correlations between music engagement from questionnaires 
and the presented quantitative metrics. We show how music 
retrieval can adapt to this engagement, developing a tablet-
based demonstrator system, with an exploratory evaluation.
Author Keywords
Engagement; Music; Retrieval; Adaptation
ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H5.2 Information interfaces and presentation: User Inter-
faces. – Graphical user interfaces.
INTRODUCTION
Music collections have grown to an extent that common 
retrieval techniques, such as scanning a list or navigating 
menus for something to listen to, would be excessively time-
consuming. Users often have a choice between this burden 
of control, or yielding control entirely, using a recommender 
system or shufﬂing music at random. This issue is com-
pounded in mobile contexts such as walking or driving, where 
fully attending to a retrieval process would be inappropriate. 
There is a need for music retrieval interactions that allow 
users to choose how much to engage and explore the large 
collections available. The music streaming service Spotify 
has over 20 million tracks available but only accessible by 
recommendation or speciﬁc query. Users have little means 
of exploring unknown content, with some 20% of tracks (4 
million) never being listened to by anyone even once.1
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation  
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the 
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
MobileHCI ’15, August 24 - 27, 2015, Copenhagen, Denmark
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3652-9/15/08 $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2785830.2785846
Figure 1. Our system (above) adapts to the user’s engagement, allow-
ing users to explore music at a high-level (e.g. selecting angry music) or
seamlessly engage to make speciﬁc selections (e.g. albums in that area).
There is increasing evidence that users vary signiﬁcantly in
terms of their engagement with music retrieval. More highly
engaged users listen to more music and take more control
over their music selection. Engagement with music also
varies with listening context, including situational, social and
multi-tasking factors [9]. Existing retrieval interfaces cater to
speciﬁc levels of user engagement. Mobile interfaces often
allow for casual input e.g. shufﬂe playback, tapping a rhythm
[1] or radio-like tuning [11]. These are often paired with high
engagement options, e.g. the menu hierarchy and textual re-
trieval seen in the Apple iPod2and Spotify.1Users are thus
often forced to choose between extremes of engagement. The
mobile user, often unable to fully engage, is disempowered in
their music listening and left with a crippled experience.
We identify design guidelines for adapting music retrieval to
the user’s level of engagement, allowing users to take as much
control over their retrieval as is appropriate to their context.
We envisage recommender systems that can be steered by
users, to a degree determined by the user’s engagement. An
example of such adaptation can be seen in Pandora,3where
users like or dislike tracks to steer recommendation. We show
in an exemplar system how users can seamlessly take con-
trol over recommendation, from hearing any popular music,
through to more speciﬁc sub-regions of music, all the way to
the user explicitly selecting individual items.
1:http://news.spotify.com/us/2013/10/07/
the-spotify-story-so-far/ (11/08/14)
2:http://www.apple.com/uk/ipodclassic/ (11/08/14)
3:http://www.pandora.com (11/08/14)
Measures & Methods
MobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark
484BACKGROUND
Too Much Choice?
While increased choice has been empirically shown to im-
prove motivation and satisfaction [12], a growing body of lit-
erature claims that too much choice can overload users, in
what is termed the ‘too–much–choice effect’ [21]. Requir-
ing users to make an explicit selection from many choices not
only incurs greater cognitive load and selection time (Hick-
Hyman’s law [10]) but may also inﬂuence the happiness of
the user. One cause of this unhappiness was proposed by
Scheibehenne et al. to be a subsequent requirement to jus-
tify choices [21]. Given that music selection is often part of a
social interaction, with a user judged by their selections [5],
we can expect this effect to apply. This issue is compounded
in mobile contexts such as when walking, which are often
inappropriate for making speciﬁc selections or queries.
Satisﬁcing & Selection
It has been widely observed that music listeners often have
no particular song in mind when engaging with a music sys-
tem and instead browse for a suitable piece of music [16].
This activity of ﬁnding the ﬁrst ‘good enough’ item is termed
satisﬁcing whereas trying to optimise to ﬁnd the best option
is termed maximising. Schwartz et al. explored maximising
versus satisﬁcing as a personality construct, claiming that in-
dividuals vary with respect to how much they optimise selec-
tions [22]. Whether a user wishes to satisﬁce or make more
exact selections will also depend upon their present context
and how much they wish to engage in the music retrieval.
Where users do not wish to expend any effort, they turn to
recommendation or random shufﬂing, seeking a serendipitous
music selection [17].
Interaction Engagement
Previous work has explored interactions which bridge from
casual to engaged styles of use. Pohl and Murray-Smith out-
line a ‘focused-casual’ continuum, pointing out that users are
empowered by selecting a level of engagement suitable to
their social, physical or mental context [19]. If a music re-
trieval system enabled users to set their level of engagement,
it could cover the maximising-satisﬁcing scale – catering to
individual users and their music-listening contexts. This dy-
namic has important implications for the user’s sense of own-
ership of the music interaction. It is likely that users would
no longer feel the pride or embarrassment related to a track
selection (as described in [5]) if control was shared with an
intelligent music system.
In casual interactions, where the user exerts less control,
a system can act more autonomously – making inferences
from prior evidence about what the user intended. This way
of handing over control was termed the ‘H-metaphor’ by
Flemisch et al. where it was likened to riding a horse – as
the rider loosens the reins, and exerts less control, the horse
behaves more autonomously [7]. Music retrieval would ben-
eﬁt from spanning this ‘focused-casual’ continuum, allowing
users to set a level of engagement appropriate to their context.
Users would have a corresponding degree of control over the
recommendations, ranging from biasing them to a style of
music, through to the explicit selection of a particular track.Music Engagement
The ﬁeld of Music Psychology has explored the concept of
music engagement, given by Greasley [8] as:
The extent to which music plays an integral role in a
person’s everyday life, including the importance of mu-
sic; the amount of music owned; uses of music; involve-
ment in music-related activities; and various other fac-
tors ... people’s levels of engagement with music repre-
sents a spectrum, with clearly identiﬁable extremes (e.g.
those who are either very highly engaged or who rarely
engage with music in daily life), and overlaps in the mid-
dle (e.g. those showing characteristics of both high and
low engagement.
It is clear that this concept of engagement is of importance
to mobile music retrieval, however this deﬁnition refers to the
relationship between listener and music, rather than the user’s
engagement in a speciﬁc interaction or act of mobile retrieval.
Greasley goes on to link music engagement to a user’s desire
to control the music they listen to, with lower levels of en-
gagement linked to radio usage rather than controlled song
selection [8]. This aspect of music engagement overlaps sig-
niﬁcantly with the concepts of satisﬁcing vs. maximising and
interaction engagement. While the notion of engagement is
multi-faceted and hard to deﬁne [15], there is work across
disciplines identifying a common theme of user effort and
desired control. Work within the ﬁeld of Music Information
Retrieval (MIR) has also touched on the idea of users having
differing degrees of involvement with music, illustrating the
range from musical indifferents tomusical savants [3].
Measurement
As a relatively new area of research, there has been little
work exploring how to measure a user’s music engagement.
Greasley used 5point Likert scales for a series of largely qual-
itative questions, aimed at different factors of music engage-
ment elicited in user interviews. These factors were the user’s
preferred level of Control over music selection, their Collec-
tionsize, the user’s Motivation for music acquisition, Mem-
oryof ﬁrst music purchase and the importance of Lyrics [8].
We adopt this questionnaire in this work, updating the word-
ing to suit digital collections (see Appendix) and explore its
relationship to other measures of engagement.
The use of experience sampling with wider Likert scales was
introduced by Greasley and Lamont, demonstrating that more
engaged music listeners tended to have greater control over
the music they heard, often selecting it to evoke speciﬁc
moods [9]. Related work by Krause et al. further explored
how users control their music selection, also using experi-
ence sampling methodology (ESM) to show that music se-
lection behaviour changes with music engagement as well as
age [13]. The use of ESM allows for an in-depth analysis of
a user’s music-listening behaviour, capturing music interac-
tions in mobile contexts as well as in the home. It is, however,
time-consuming to run and difﬁcult to scale to many partic-
ipants. Notably, ESM illuminates the variance in behaviour
between sessions of music-listening within one participant –
music engagement varies with listening context, including sit-
uational, social and multi-tasking factors [9].
Measures & Methods
MobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark
485Music Retrieval Interfaces
Music retrieval interfaces typically afford very low or very
high user engagement and control, as discussed in the intro-
duction. These are often complementary, for example the tex-
tual search and ‘radio’ recommenders in Spotify, or the hier-
archical menu and shufﬂe features of the iPod. Adaptivity is
sometimes employed, for example the relevance feedback in
Pandora. Stober and N ¨urnberger give a thorough treatment of
approaches for adapting music retrieval to user context [23].
The radio metaphor for casual music interaction is com-
pelling for mobile use, building upon a familiar and success-
ful music retrieval interface, especially in driving contexts
where users can spare limited attention. Previous work by
Hopmann et al. sought to bring the beneﬁts of interaction
with vintage analog radio to an engaged and controlling style
of retrieval in modern digital music collections [11]. They
point out that the status quo of using a hierarchical organisa-
tion of music does not support free navigation. Their sys-
tem enabled navigation of a 1D music space, arranged by
genre/artist/album, with the look-and-feel of a vintage ra-
dio. Earlier work on radio-like interaction by Crossan and
Murray-Smith, using rhythmic input, incorporated the uncer-
tainty of the user’s input into the retrieval [4]. This approach
allowed users to choose how well deﬁned they wished their
rhythmic queries to be. This query speciﬁcity and effort re-
quired to produce a query mirrors the concepts of music en-
gagement discussed. Later work on rhythmic retrieval made
linked query speciﬁcity and user engagement, allowing users
to casually query by tempo, or reproduce a speciﬁc song [1].
MEASURING USER INTERACTION
By combining detailed music listening histories (acquired
from Last.fm), with song durations acquired from Spotify, we
propose a number of measures of users’ interaction with their
music retrieval systems. Notably, many mobile music players
support Last.fm play logging. Adding a song’s duration to
the time its playback started gives an indication of when the
song would end without further intervention. Where a new
song begins immediately after the expected end time of a pre-
vious song, this is indicative of automatic playback such as
playlists or albums – evidence of a lack of user intervention.
Songs which are interrupted early by a subsequent song, or
which are followed by another song after a brief pause are
evidence of users intervening to ﬁnd new music to listen to.
Album-Based Playback
Despite the shift to digital music consumption, listening to
music in the form of albums remains a common music-
listening behaviour. Detecting this behaviour from a user’s
music listening logs is trivial, as consecutive tracks will have
the same album metadata As. We assume that where consec-
utive tracks are played from the same album, this was due to
their being from the same album. The ordering of tracks on
the album is not considered, as this would introduce a con-
found with shufﬂe versus sequential playback. The detection
of selection being an Album-based behaviour is thus:4
Album =1
n 1nX
s=2[AsAs 1]:Interventions
The user interventions described can be stated formally as
Skipping andSwitching. For a song swith start time ts, song
durationdsand subsequent song start time ts+1:
ts=ts+1 (ts+ds)
Skipping =1
n 1n 1X
s=1[ts<0]:
Assuming that automatic song playback occurs within a
threshold of ta= 100ms of a previous song ending and that
user intervention to switch or select a new song will occur
within a threshold of tt= 30s, yields:
Switching =1
n 1n 1X
s=1[ts>ta^ts<tt]:
The assumed value for ttis conservative to ensure that the
measured pauses are part of a continuous music retrieval in-
teraction. The aim is to detect whether a song was selected
automatically or by manual intervention; delays greater than
30sbecome increasingly likely to be due to external events.
User intervention in music listening can be considered as
a Bernoulli process i.e. a binary choice between whether a
user selected a song or it was automatic. The examples in
this work consider users across all their listening sessions,
assuming interventions are a homogeneous process (with a
ﬁxed probability). In practice, user behaviour will inevitably
change with context, however these assumptions still allow
for a user’s overall behaviour to be modelled. Users can thus
be characterised in terms of their Intervention Rate – the rate
at which they intervene with a Skipping orSwitching event.
Speed
While the occurrence of an intervention may provide some
information about music-listening behaviour, we hypothesise
that the speed at which users intervene may add further detail.
We propose measures of Switching speed – how quickly a
user switches to a new track after a previous track ends, and
Skip speed – how far, proportionally, into a song does a user
decide to skip track. In the case of Skipping, we normalise
time against track length, given the large variation in track
durations. To mitigate the effect of large outliers where a
track nearly completed, the harmonic mean of time is used.
As we are interested in speed, we then take the reciprocal,
yielding a simple equation. Considering only the nsongs
where a Skipping event has been detected:
Skipspeed =1
n 1n 1X
s=1ds
ts:
We calculate Switch speed in a similar manner. Considering
only thensongs where a Switching event has been detected:
Switchspeed =1
n 1n 1X
s=11
ts:
4:Iverson bracket notation used for clarity.
Measures & Methods
MobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark
486Figure 2. Responses to our adapted music engagement questionnaire, n= 95. Full questions and responses can be viewed in the Appendix. Respondents
were Last.fm users and thus responses were more likely to show higher engagement with music.
EXPLORATORY STUDY
We conducted an exploratory study to link the concept of mu-
sic engagement to the way users interact with their music
retrieval system. The music engagement and music selec-
tion questionnaires from music psychology were combined
and updated for digital collections (see Appendix) and posted
along with a request for Last.fm usernames to a messaging
board for Last.fm users. These usernames were used to data
mine respondents’ listening history in order to calculate our
intervention measures, giving an insight into how users in-
teracted with music retrieval systems over many years. We
received 95 responses, shown in Figure 2, of which we were
able to mine 89 usable listening histories. 88% reported use
of mobile music selection, 93% use of a computer, 60% use
of streamed music and only 18% use of radio.
The questionnaire responses were mostly skewed toward high
engagement with music. The importance of Lyrics has a dis-
tinctly different distribution. Cronbach’s for all factors was
0:43, indicating that the questionnaire is covering a number of
distinct facets of users’ music engagement. How much Con-
trola user likes to have over music selection is the most rel-
evant of the factors to the measures of intervention, with the
others addressing more qualitative aspects. We calculated the
measures of Album based listening, Intervention Rate, Skip
speed, Select speed from the listening histories of the respon-
dents, and their correlations with Control, given in table 1.
Control Album Interv. Skip Speed
Control
Album 0.26*
Interventions -0.29* -0.51**
Skip Speed 0.48** 0.29** -0.74**
Select Speed 0.25* 0.51** -0.84** 0.47**
Table 1. Polyserial correlations of users’ self-reported Control over mu-
sic selection and the measures of music-listening behaviour derived from
their listening histories. * p < 0:05 , **p < 0:01.Listener Proﬁles
The results in table 1 paint a somewhat surprising picture of
how music engagement inﬂuences user interaction. Album
based listening showed signiﬁcant moderate correlation with
users’ self-reported preferred Control. Naturally, this also
meant a signiﬁcant inverse correlation with user intervention
in music playback. While it might appear counter-intuitive
that desire for Control leads to fewer interventions, engaged
listeners are more likely to invest in selecting a speciﬁc al-
bum. Casual music listening, by shufﬂe or recommendation,
requires less initial investment, but then more corrective ac-
tions are required. We conﬁrmed our album detection with
an independent-samples t-test between users who had or had
not listed album-based selection, with signiﬁcant differences
inAlbum, Skip speed (p<: 01), and Interventions (p<: 05).
Control also had signiﬁcant correlations with Skip speed and
Select speed. More musically engaged listeners made quicker
interventions in their music listening. This adds to the pro-
ﬁle of musically engaged listeners who know what they want
and who need to make few interventions, which are decisive
and quick. Combining the qualitative work of music psychol-
ogy with our empirical measures of how these users inter-
acted with their music retrieval interfaces, we can identify the
following listener proﬁles as targets:
Engaged These users have a high initial engagement in the
interaction, with more speciﬁc retrieval queries e.g. select-
ing a particular album. They then make very few further
interventions, which are quick and decisive.
Casual These users wish to satisﬁce, investing little effort in
the retrieval at any given point. Their lack of initial con-
trol means that these users need to be able to easily make
corrective interventions.
Mixed Most users vary between levels of Casual toEngaged
music listening, depending on their listening context.
Measures & Methods
MobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark
487Figure 3. As the user exerts control, the distribution of predicted input for a given song becomes narrower. This means the system can give more weight
to the user’s input and infer a belief about their listening intent over fewer songs. (a) shows a casual music selection, with no pressure applied, the user
sees the entire axis with mood labels to give a sense of the layout. (b) shows a more engaged music selection, with the user now applying pressure, the
view zooms semantically to show album artwork for a range of music of a particular mood, allowing users to get more speciﬁc recommendations of
popular music. (c) shows a fully engaged music selection, when maximum pressure is applied, users are able to zoom in to view a speciﬁc album artwork
and make an exact selection, with the system deferring entirely to their input.
EXAMPLE SYSTEM
To demonstrate how mobile music retrieval can scale with a
user’s engagement, we augment a popular music retrieval in-
terface (Spotify) on a tablet as in Figure 1. We add a semantic
zooming view of a simple linear music space, enabling both
casual and engaged forms of interaction – giving users vary-
ing degrees of control over the selection of music. The music
was arranged on one axis as this is the simplest possible, and
requires the least engagement. By allowing users to make
selections from the general to the speciﬁc, the new interface
supports both maximising and satisﬁcing. Users can make
broad and uncertain general selections to casually describe
what they want to listen to. However, they can also exert more
control over the system and force it to play a speciﬁc song. A
recommender system infers relevant music given user input,
engagement and prior evidence of listening intent.
Inferring Listening Intent
As the user yields control over the retrieval, the system is
able to act in an increasingly autonomous fashion. The input
from the user can be considered coarser as they become less
engaged, having less weight on the behaviour of the system.
The intended selection can then be inferred from prior evi-
dence of music listening intent, for example song popularity,
previous listening history or social recommendations. While
the user’s input itself may be coarser when the user is less en-
gaged,5in other cases similar input must be evaluated in the
context of different engagement levels. An example would be
a touchscreen event when a user is casually browsing through
an overview of a music library versus an explicit selection of
a piece of music. In order to interpret this input, the system
must be aware of the engagement context, for example by
sensing it with the mobile device’s accelerometers [14].While engagement could be inferred from user behaviour, we
allow users to express it explicitly by pressing on a pressure
sensor with their left hand as they navigate with their right –
employing a design metaphor of physical exertion as engage-
ment. The levels of engagement (and handover of control)
may be continuous or occur on a number of discrete levels.
Discretisation allows distinct operating modes that are clearly
delineated, but burdens users with understanding the implica-
tions of each mode, and with managing transitions between
multiple modes. As an alternative, we explore the use of en-
gagement as a continuous variable, acting as a parameter in
the inferential system and changing the dynamics of a single
and consistent interaction.
As the user begins an interaction, they have not applied pres-
sure and therefore are not highly engaged in the retrieval. The
view of the music collection is zoomed out and shows mood
labels describing the layout of the music space. The inferred
selection is thus broad, covering an entire mood region and is
biased towards popular tracks (Figure 3a). At low levels of
engagement, users receive recommendations of highly pop-
ular tracks. When the user applies pressure, the system in-
terprets this as the user taking control to make a more exact
selection. The inferred selection is smaller, the view zooms
semantically to show the album art of the selection (Figure
3b). This selection is a combination of evidence from the
user’s navigated position with prior evidence i.e. song popu-
larity. Users retain the ability to make explicit album selec-
tions by fully applying pressure (Figure 3c). By varying the
pressure, users can seamlessly set their level of engagement
and control over music selection.
5:for example in Pohl and Murray-Smith’s work on casual inter-
action [19]
Measures & Methods
MobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark
488Inference
The handover from casual to engaged interaction relies upon
an inferential model of user listening intent. We assume that
when making casual selections, users will navigate to a broad
area of musical interest, e.g. happy music. We also assume
that as users engage and wish to make more speciﬁc selec-
tions, they will use the richer album art and metadata feed-
back to navigate to a few (or one) albums of interest. We
can encode these assumptions about the user’s behaviour as
a generative model i.e. one that predicts the user’s inputs for
a given level of engagement, as in Figure 3. Put simply, it
predicts casual users will point roughly near the type of mu-
sic they want and engaged users will navigate to exactly what
they wish to hear.
We implement this generative model of user input ixalong
thexaxis conditioned upon a target song and level of en-
gagement. The input is modelled using a Gaussian Mix-
ture Model, with a component corresponding to each song
siwithin the music collection. Each component is a Gaus-
sian distribution, with the centroid positioned according to
the song’s position xsin the one-dimensional music projec-
tion, with distribution width controlled by the precision :
p(ixjsi) =r
2e (ix xs)2
2:
The precision parameter is inversely proportional to the unit
variance2
dof the distribution. As users apply pressure, the
precision is scaled by the denoted engagement E2(0;1]:
=E
2
d:
This generative model can be used to infer a belief that a given
songsiis of interest to the user, conditioned upon an input
positionixand the level of user engagement E:
p(sijix;E) =p(ixjsi;E)p(sijE)
p(ixjE):
The prior belief p(sijE)over the music space allows existing
evidence of listening intent to be incorporated, conditioned
on the current level of engagement. In our work we use the
music’s current popularity on Spotify so that the system can
recommend popular music to the user. We marginalise out en-
gagement from this prior, making the simplifying assumption
that only expected input varies with engagement and not mu-
sic preference. Our approach does, however, allow for sup-
porting differing listening preferences based on engagement,
if such data were available.
Mapping Interaction to Inference
The level of detail presented to the user should be appropri-
ate for their current level of engagement. This is a natural
application for semantic zooming – users making broad se-
lections would not beneﬁt from seeing the artwork of each
album and so we zoom out to showing only general labels
such as a mood. As users engage and the interface zooms in,
the mood labels give way to popular artists and then artwork.The greatest disadvantage to generative modelling is that
where the model does not conform well to the user, the user
will be unable to predict the behaviour of the system. As the
interaction is increasingly conditioned upon the inference, the
exposure to this problem is greater. This can be mitigated by
adhering to the principle of ‘direct manipulation’ such that the
mapping between input and output is clear to the user. In this
work we take a conservative approach, where engagement is
taken as being linear with exerted pressure and the semantic
zooming is done linearly with engagement. We sample tracks
from the inferred posterior distribution of songs in real-time
and highlight their album art with a faint glow. Tracks are
also shown in the playlist frame of the Spotify UI in order of
inferred listening intent.
Projecting the music space
The simplest representation of a music space is a one dimen-
sional projection. An assumption of our system is that simi-
lar songs are placed near to each other, such that when users
are disengaged, they can select a whole coherent region of
the music space. We use information about the mood of the
music to arrange the collection however genre or other fea-
tures and metadata could be used. We take a high dimensional
feature space produced by MoodAgent,6a commercial music
signal processing system focused on mood-related music fea-
tures. While we could use a single one of these features (e.g.
tempo) to arrange the music collection, we attempt to main-
tain more of the information by using non-linear dimension-
ality reduction. Venna et al. introduce an information retrieval
perspective on such techniques, presenting their state-of-the-
art NeRV algorithm for balancing recall and precision in the
projection [24]. This trade-off between keeping similar items
together and dissimilar items apart can be modiﬁed using a
parameter. Using NeRV we project the high dimensional
music feature space into a one dimensional space – we show
how the original features inﬂuence this projection in Figure 4.
In this example, anger is inversely correlated with tenderness,
with joyful music peaking in the centre of the projection.
Figure 4. The music is arranged by taking the mood features such as
Anger, Joy and Tender and creating a one-dimensional projection.
6:http://www.moodagent.com/ (11/08/14)
Measures & Methods
MobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark
489EVALUATION
It is inherently difﬁcult to ﬁnd an objective means of evalu-
ating such a personalised music system. Schedl and Flexer
identify this challenge as a key reason that little work has
been done in personalised music systems [20]. They note the
need to consider the user from an early point in the devel-
opment process. Our generative modelling based approach
allows us to simulate user input to characterise the behaviour
of the system. We also evaluated our approach and design
assumptions in a series of design sessions with music listen-
ers. In our evaluations, the music space used was taken from
the UK Top 40 singles charts over the past 50 years. Audio
was streamed from Spotify, with our engagement-dependent
interface integrated within the Spotify web player UI.
Engagement-Dependent Retrieval
As the system is based upon a generative model of user in-
put, we are able to easily characterise the input required from
users in various scenarios. Using the design assumption of
users casually choosing popular music, we show how input
required from users varies with the popularity of the retrieved
track. Figure 5 shows how accurately the user must navigate
to a song for it to be played, at different levels of engage-
ment and for songs of different popularity. We can thus link
the behaviour of our system to the music listening proﬁles we
identiﬁed as targets from our exploratory study.
Casual This proﬁle called for allowing users to satisﬁce and
make corrective actions with little effort. The example sys-
tem supports this with recommendations of popular music
from the broad area navigated to, requiring only swipe ges-
tures to select or change music. The recommender system
largely controls the music selection, with coarse high-level
inﬂuence from user input. Notably, it is impossible to se-
lect the least popular songs at low engagement.
Engaged This proﬁle called for allowing users to invest ef-
fort in making an exact selection of an album. The system
supports this by letting users apply pressure to zoom into
a speciﬁc mood region, or even an album of interest. At
high levels of engagement, the user input dwarfs the rec-
ommender’s inﬂuence, with popularity having little effect.
Mixed The intermediate levels of engagement are supported
by letting users quickly set their engagement, with the con-
tinuous handover of control using the pressure sensor. As
users engage, their input has increasing inﬂuence. Se-
mantic zooming gives users feedback about how speciﬁc
a query at a given level of engagement would be.
Design sessions
Six participants, in groups of 2, took part in informal design
sessions which focused on discussing the music interaction
described in this work, and in particular the beneﬁts of be-
ing able to engage with a mood-based semantically zooming
view. Each was given time to freely use the tablet to explore
the collection and experiment with making a variety of music
selections at different levels of engagement. We used this ex-
perience to generate discussion with each of them about how
they currently ﬁnd and listen to music and how our system
might support or enhance those habits.
Figure 5. The required accuracy for song selection against user engage-
ment. Popular songs can be selected by casually navigating near them.
Unpopular songs are only selected when the user is highly engaged and
navigates exactly to them. As engagement increases, the user takes con-
trol from the recommender, and songs become equally targetable.
Shufﬂe and Casual Music Selection
Five of the participants reported using both shufﬂe and ex-
plicit selection to play music, while only one exclusively used
explicit selection. Participants stated that they typically use
shufﬂe for background music or alleviating the social pres-
sures of selecting music, as discussed in the literature review.
This supports our prediction that the ability to vary the de-
gree of engagement is desirable, with four participants often
creating playlists of songs speciﬁcally to shufﬂe over. These
playlists were based on personal heuristics and were often
kept to a small number of songs to guarantee similarity be-
tween items. We highlight that users are seeking to engage
with their music system at a level between shufﬂe and explicit
selection, which is often unsupported in existing interfaces.
Curation and Taking Control
Participants all expressed a desire to curate the collection.
One suggested that there could be more room for subtle dif-
ferences between tracks in a personal collection, which would
allow ﬁner grained control over even uncertain selections.
One pair felt that having more control over the music in the
collection would lead to a greater understanding of the organ-
isation, commenting that “I’d like to be able to apply more
of my own decision making.” This sentiment was echoed in
comments about the labels. One participant commented that
self-deﬁned labels would be better, even if not fully represen-
tative of the underlying mood – “people might be annoyed if
all their favourite albums are classed as ‘sad’... I would prefer
‘melancholic’, it has nicer connotations.” Clearly, a desire for
customisation is present – a form of even further engagement
in the music retrieval interaction.
Sources of Evidence
Our implementation uses music popularity as a source of ev-
idence for weighting songs as more likely to be played. This
comes from a design assumption that satisﬁcing is supported
by playing such songs. The design session revealed that users
felt that in doing this recent additions to their music collection
were underplayed. By including when the album was added
to the collection as prior evidence, we can bias the selection
towards recent additions as well and support this use case.
Measures & Methods
MobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark
490DISCUSSION
The exploratory study conﬁrmed the arguments made in the
literature review, showing that music engagement and desired
control over music retrieval varies with user and listening
context. This result is certainly not controversial, however
we are also able to link new measures of listening behaviour
to self-reported desire for control, yielding listening proﬁles
at different levels of engagement. Of particular note is that
desire for greater control over music actually correlated with
less interventions and the use of album-based playback. This
shows that high music engagement manifests as an initial
burst of engaged music retrieval, and it is possible that over
an entire listening session, the casual listener may even have
interacted more with their music system.
The measures of music listening we developed allow us to
make a useful distinction in users’ listening behaviour. While
users wishing to have control actually intervened less, where
they did intervene, it was done quickly. This raises an in-
teresting question regarding how engagement in interaction
is presently considered – whether more interaction events
means greater engagement versus a few decisive and control-
ling interaction events. We must also consider that musically
engaged listeners may be more likely to consider albums as a
single work of art, rejecting track by track selection. Album-
based listening inherently means fewer interventions (hence
the strongest correlation), and engaged music listeners may
not wish to interfere with an album. Music retrieval is shaped
by such cultural factors. For example, Last.fm users logging
their listens are biased to high engagement, and further work
is needed to test if our results generalise.
Measuring Music Engagement
It is clear from the music engagement questionnaire, and the
measured internal reliability, that the questions cover a num-
ber of loosely connected factors. This is to be expected, given
the broad deﬁnition of music engagement, and there is thus a
need to consider factors of engagement individually. In the
context of music retrieval, we have highlighted the Control
factor as being particularly relevant. While it is important to
consider the affective factors in order to fully capture user
engagement [15], there is an opportunity to develop a quan-
titative, inter-disciplinary theory of engagement as control,
building on work using control theory and measuring inter-
action in bits [19]. Such an approach can be also linked to
the speciﬁcity of information need in Information Retrieval,
as has been done here with music.
The example system we present is useful in showing how
retrieval can adapt to a user’s engagement. It also serves
to highlight the challenges facing engagement-dependent re-
trieval. Most notably, we asked users to explicitly denote
their engagement, having them squeeze a pressure sensor as
a proxy. While this is a reasonable metaphor to employ, it
would be desirable to infer a user’s engagement from en-
hanced sensing and previous behaviour. Also, our approach
to adapting to engagement involved developing models of
user behaviour across levels of engagement, requiring design
insight or model ﬁtting. The evaluative design sessions high-
lighted that users would prefer to customise such a system, as
part of a highly engaged music interaction.Music Spaces
The behaviour of this system is closely linked to the music
space used. In this work we used a music space likely to
be familiar to all participants, however this does introduce
some issues. In early testing we used the most popular 5000
tracks from the UK charts over the last ﬁve decades and found
that the resulting music space was too homogeneous to navi-
gate meaningfully. In an effort to increase the diversity of the
music space, we randomly sampled from the music collec-
tion instead, yielding the distinct mood regions seen. The 1D
space broadly reﬂected the culturally universal arousal aspect
of mood [6]. The use of mood itself is supported by evidence
that mood features describe music as well as genre [2] and
that users listen to music by mood [18].
Users disliked when dissimilar songs were together. A bene-
ﬁt of using the NeRV algorithm to project the music arrange-
ment is being able to adjust the parameter to favour pre-
cision (keeping dissimilar items apart) over recall (keeping
similar items together). Using feedback from users while it-
erating the design of our system, we biased strongly to-
ward precision to keep dissimilar items apart and improve
perceived system quality. The need to avoid stark outliers
has been noted within MIR; Paul Lamere of Echonest intro-
duced the ‘WTF test’ for automatic playlists, with systems
scored negatively for each outlier.7The true test for an inter-
face such as the one presented would be to use the user’s own
music collection for the projection, as part of a longitudinal
study of music listening behaviour.
Market-Based Evaluation
We have designed an engagement-dependent retrieval sys-
tem and developed measures of music listening behaviour
and engagement. While we have shown the behaviour of
the system using technical measures and qualitative feed-
back, it would be desirable to study the longitudinal impact
that using such a system would have on listening behaviour.
Though we could conduct further small-scale studies, it is
preferable to widely deploy a full music system, which users
can adopt for their day to day listening. The concepts we
present in this work have been applied in a commercial, tablet
format, engagement-dependent music retrieval system – the
BeoSound Moment, announced at CES 2015. This product
will be used for further evaluation, measuring the impact of
these approaches on listener behaviour.
Wider Application
The engagement-dependent approach has applications be-
yond music retrieval. Users have access to large volumes of
media such as movies and photos, e.g. with Netﬂix and Flickr.
We argue that users are better served by letting them engage
in a retrieval that is appropriate to their context. While rec-
ommender systems have done much in the way of alleviating
users of the issue of too-much-choice, there will always be
cases where users wish to have more input into the selection.
Incorporating user engagement into recommender systems al-
lows users to beneﬁt from recommendation, while retaining a
degree of control that suits their current context.
7:http://musicmachinery.com/2011/05/14/
how-good-is-googles-instant-mix/ (11/08/14)
Measures & Methods
MobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark
491CONCLUSION
This work introduces users’ music engagement as important
for the development of music retrieval interfaces, especially
in mobile contexts. We combined the music engagement
questionnaires from music psychology to survey music lis-
teners, and developed novel metrics to capture their retrieval
behaviour from their listening histories. We then identiﬁed
relationships between these measures and presented listener
proﬁles to guide the design of music retrieval interfaces.
A tablet-based system was developed that can adapt to users’
engagement, supporting the listener proﬁles we identiﬁed. A
ﬂexible recommender system allows users to broadly select
a style of music, or to take control and make more speciﬁc
music selections. A generative model of user input at differ-
ent levels of engagement enables the system to infer relevant
music, with music popularity providing prior evidence. In
an agent based evaluation, we show that the system supports
the range of interaction styles given in the listener proﬁles,
to allow mobile music retrieval at a user’s chosen level of en-
gagement. Design sessions were also held, showing that users
liked to vary their engagement but that some users wished to
have even greater control. This work contributes a set of novel
metrics of music listening using insights from psychology,
MIR and HCI, and also an engagement-dependent approach
to music retrieval adopted in a commercial product.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Bang & Olufsen, the Danish
Council for Strategic Research of the Danish Agency for Sci-
ence Technology and Innovation under the CoSound project,
case number 11-115328, and the University of Glasgow. This
publication only reﬂects the authors’ views.
REFERENCES
1. Boland, D., and Murray-Smith, R. Finding my beat:
personalised rhythmic ﬁltering for mobile music
interaction. In Proc. MobileHCI, ACM (2013).
2. Boland, D., and Murray-Smith, R. Information-theoretic
measures of music listening behaviour. In Proc. ISMIR
(2014).
3. Celma, O. Music Recommendation and Discovery: The
Long Tail, Long Fail, and Long Play in the Digital
Music Space. Springer, 2010.
4. Crossan, A., and Murray-Smith, R. Rhythmic interaction
for song ﬁltering on a mobile device. In Proc. HAID,
Springer (2006).
5. Cunningham, S. J., Jones, S., and Jones, M. Organizing
digital music for use: an examination of personal music
collections. In Proc. ISMIR (2004).
6. Egermann, H., Fernando, N., Chuen, L., and McAdams,
S. Music induces universal emotion-related
psychophysiological responses: Comparing canadian
listeners to congolese pygmies. Frontiers in Psychology
5, 1341 (2015).
7. Flemisch, O., Adams, A., Conway, S. R., Goodrich,
K. H., Palmer, M. T., and Schutte, P. C. The H-Metaphor
as a Guideline for Vehicle Automation and Interaction.
Tech. rep., NASA, 2003.8. Greasley, A. E. Engagement with music in everyday life:
and in-depth study of adults’ musical preferences and
listening behaviours. PhD thesis, University of Keele,
2008.
9. Greasley, A. E., and Lamont, A. Exploring engagement
with music in everyday life using experience sampling
methodology. Musicae Scientiae 15, 1 (2011), 45–71.
10. Hick, W. E. On the rate of gain of information. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 4 (1952), 11–26.
11. Hopmann, M., Vexo, F., Gutierrez, M., and Thalmann,
D. Vintage radio interface: Analog control for digital
collections. In Proc. CHI (2012).
12. Iyengar, S. S., and Lepper, M. R. When choice is
demotivating: Can one desire too much of a good thing?
Journal of personality and social psychology 79, 6
(2000), 995–1006.
13. Krause, A., North, A., and Hewitt, L. Music selection
behaviors in everyday listening. Journal of Broadcasting
& Electronic Media 58, 2 (2014), 306–323.
14. Kuhn, M., Wattenhofer, R., Wirz, M., Fluckiger, M., and
Troster, G. Sensing Dance Engagement for Collaborative
Music Control. In Proc. ISWC, IEEE (2011).
15. Lalmas, M., O’Brien, H., and Yom-Tov, E. Measuring
User Engagement. Information Concepts, Retrieval, and
Services. Morgan & Claypool, 2014.
16. Laplante, A. Everyday Life Music Information-Seeking
Behaviour of Young Adults: An Exploratory Study.
Master’s thesis, McGill University, Quebec, 2008.
17. Leong, T., Vetere, F., and Howard, S. The serendipity
shufﬂe. In Proc. OzCHI (2005).
18. Lonsdale, A. J., and North, A. C. Why do we listen to
music? a uses and gratiﬁcations analysis. British Journal
of Psychology 102, 1 (2011), 108–134.
19. Pohl, H., and Murray-Smith, R. Focused and casual
interactions: Allowing users to vary their level of
engagement. In Proc. CHI (2013).
20. Schedl, M., and Flexer, A. Putting the User in the Center
of Music Information Retrieval. In Proc. ISMIR (2012).
21. Scheibehenne, B., Greifeneder, R., and Todd, P. M.
What moderates the too-much-choice effect? Journal of
Psychology & Marketing 26(3) (2009), 229–253.
22. Schwartz, B., Ward, A., Monterosso, J., Lyubomirsky,
S., White, K., and Lehman, D. R. Maximizing versus
satisﬁcing: Happiness is a matter of choice. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 83 (2002),
1178–1197.
23. Stober, S., and N ¨urnberger, A. Adaptive music
retrieval-a state of the art. Multimedia Tools and
Applications 65, 3 (2013), 467–494.
24. Venna, J., Peltonen, J., Nybo, K., Aidos, H., and Kaski,
S. Information retrieval perspective to nonlinear
dimensionality reduction for data visualization. Journal
of Machine Learning Research 11 (2010), 451–490.
Measures & Methods
MobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark
492APPENDIX
The following music engagement and use questionnaire is
based on similar questionnaires in [9, 13]. They covered the
factors of music engagement and the selection methods used
in music listening. We combined these questionnaires and
also updated the wording of some questions to reﬂect digi-
tal music listening. This following questions were presented
to users in an interactive Google Forms webpage, accessible
via a link posted to forums of last.fm users. The ﬁrst two
questions are multiple choice, while the remaining are forced
choice Likert scale (1–5) to reﬂect music engagement.
Questionnaire
The aim of this questionnaire is to gather data on people’s
music listening behaviour. You will be asked to provide your
Last.fm username so that your publicly shared Scrobbles can
be analysed. Completing this questionnaire is taken as con-
sent for this analysis.
Please enter your Last.fm username:
Username
We will only analyse your public Scrobbles to identify your
music-listening behaviour.
Think about the last few times you listened to music and tick
the selection methods you used.
I did not have any control
It was performed live at the time
Watched TV
Personal premade playlist
Speciﬁc artist
Premade playlist - by someone else
Speciﬁc song
Listened to the radio
Speciﬁc album
Someone I was with chose
Random/Shufﬂe
Computer Recommendation
Website streaming
Other:
Please state
Please tick the devices you often use to listen to music.
Mobile MP3
Mobile Phone
Mobile CD
Computer - own music
Computer - streamed music
Computer - music store in the cloud
Stereo - MP3
Stereo - CD
Radio
TV
In public - live
In public - recordedHow much control do you like to have over the music you lis-
ten to?
I generally listen to whatever is played
I listen to a particular radio channel or recommenda-
tions in a style of music I like
Sometimes I like to choose, sometimes I’ll listen to ra-
dio or recommendations
I generally prefer listening to music Ive chosen e.g. in
a playlist I made
I like to have full control over which album or song I’m
listening to
How much music do you have in your collection (in iTunes,
MP3 player, Spotify etc)?
Up to 5 albums or about 50 MP3s
Up to 25 albums or about 250 MP3s
Up to 125 albums or about 1250 MP3s
Up to 5000 albums or about 50,000 MP3s
More than 5000 albums or 50,000 MP3s
What best describes your music collection?
All my collection is organised by hand in a certain way
My collection is broadly categorised by hand (e.g.
genre or mood playlists/folders)
My music system organises my collection for me
There is no speciﬁc organisation to my music collection
I can never ﬁnd anything when I want it!
Can you remember the ﬁrst album you bought?
Yes, I can remember what it was and exactly when and
where I bought it
I can remember what it was, but not exactly when I
bought it
Not off hand, I probably could if I thought about it
I doubt it
I have no idea
Why did you make your last music purchase?
I had to have it, I heard it and I just had to go and buy it
I knew I would like it, because I’ve built up a knowl-
edge of what I like
I’d heard a couple of the tracks I liked so bought it to
see if the whole thing was good
It was recommended to me, so I thought I’d give it a go
I can’t remember
Lyrics in music, which best describes you?
I never really listen to the lyrics in songs
With some of my favourite music I know the lyrics, but
otherwise I don’t really pay attention to the lyrics in
songs
I like to know the lyrics so I can sing along
I have to know the lyrics because it’s central to under-
standing what the artist is trying to convey
I have to know the lyrics because I don’t want to be
singing along to something that might be at odds with
my beliefs
Measures & Methods
MobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark
493