PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7 , No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. Understanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive 
Medication Support Against HIV for Men who Have Sex 
with Men in Taiwan   
CHIEN WEN (TINA) YUAN , National Taiwan University, Taiwan  
YUAN -CHI TSENG , National Tsing Hua University , Taiwan  
CAROL STRONG , National Cheng Kung University , Taiwan  
Sexual health is an important domain that deserves more HCI attention, such as supporting the practices of 
men who have sex with men (MSM) against HIV risks. One current clinical approach to addressing this issue 
is to use preventive medicine like pre -exposure prophylaxis (PrEP). As medication adherence of PrEP is 
challenging that involves users’ individual knowledge, sex practices, relational status, and community support, 
technological media tion benefits from a human -centered perspective that goes beyond individual -level support 
to understand MSM’s needs so as to design a holistic technological intervention for them. With an in -depth 
interview (n = 22) with MSM from two major cities in Taiwan , we drew on the theoretical framework of the 
social ecological model and identified three levels of influences, including individual, interpersonal, and 
sociocultural, that shape the enablers, inhibitors, risks and challenges, and support towards MSM’s Pr EP use. 
We proposed correspondent technological design implications to support what we found based on the 
understanding of our participants.  
CCS Concepts: • Human -centered computing  → Collaborative and social computing ; Empirical studies 
in collaborative  and social computing  
Additional Key Words and Phrases : Human -centered design; Sexual health; mHealth; Social Ecological 
Model; Men who have sex with men (MSM); Multi -level support  
ACM Reference format:  
Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng , Carol Strong . 2023. Understanding and Designing Multi -level 
Preventive Medication Support Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan . Proc. ACM Hum. -
Comput. Interact , 7, CSCW2 , Article 310 (October  2023), 30 pages, https://doi.org/10.1145/3610101  
1 INTRODUCTION  
Health practitioners and designers have started to leverage various technologies to support and 
promote health -related behaviors. Preventing infectious diseases, such as the human 
 
This.is work is supported by the National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan , under grant 109-2223-E-007-001-MY3, 
grant 112-2918-I-007-003, grant 109-2221-E-003 -010 -MY3, grant 110-2634-F-002 -051, grant 112-2636-B-006-007 and grant 
112-2314-B-006-081-MY3. 
Author’s addresses: Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan, tinayuan@ntu.edu.tw, National Taiwan University, Taiwan; Yuan -Chi 
Tseng, yc.tseng@iss.nthu.edu.tw, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan; Carol Strong, carol.chiajung@gmail.com, 
National Cheng Kung Universit y, Taiwan.  
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee 
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to 
lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
2573-0142/2023/ 10 – Art310 $15.00  
© Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3610101  310310:2   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. immunodeficiency virus (HIV), is one proactive and significant application o f technology. The 
HIV attacks the immune system of the body. If not treated, HIV can develop into AIDS (acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome). According to the latest statistics from the U.S. Centers for Disease 
Control, there are over 1.2 million people liv ing with HIV in the United States, with 13% of them 
not knowing their condition, and around 35,000 newly infected cases per year [17]. The report 
indicates that several vulnerable populations are more easily susceptible to HIV, including racial 
and ethnic minorities, men who have sex with men (MSM), and transgender women [17]. To 
prevent these populations from HIV infections, a major clinical approach is through preventive 
medication, or oral  antiretroviral pre -exposure prophylaxis (PrEP), a biomedical HIV prevention 
that has been implemented among uninfected yet highly risk -prone individuals since 2012 in the 
U.S. [3]. However, the success of PrEP against HIV heavily relies on its users’ adherence to the 
complex medication regimen and management of their health/sex practices [30]. Previous studies 
have iden tified obstacles to raising awareness about PrEP for users living with HIV risks (e.g., [10, 
27, 39, 59, 79, 90] ). Our study proposes to augment medical prevention with technology at multiple 
levels, including individual, interpersonal, and sociocultural levels. With that aim, it is important 
to understand key target users’ needs and practices for human -centered design.  
Among a wide variety of populations living with potential HIV risks, MSM account for 23% of 
new adult HIV infections globally in 2019. To break down the numbers, MSM account for more 
than 40% of new adult HIV infections in Asia, the Pacific, and Latin America and more than 60% 
in western and central Europe and North America, according to the latest United Nations report 
[77]. MSM are the major and most susceptible population to HIV [35, 38] . Research has established 
that their awareness about PrEP was as low as 47.2% [19], not to mention an even lower actual 
adoption rate. It is important to increase awareness a nd further the adoption of PrEP among the 
population to reduce their risks to HIV infections.  
Research in medication adherence and behavioral changes has always been a key domain in 
the CSCW/CHI community. Yet, topics related to sexual health, especially HIV and the 
correspondent support, are still underexplored [15, 16, 65, 84] . Recent CSCW/HCI studies have 
started to address i ssues about HIV -related stigmas and user privacy for self -disclosure, 
behavioral interventions, community support, and data -sharing [15, 46, 48, 55, 57, 64 -66, 83, 84] . 
This study intends to complement the existing research by focusing on understanding MSM living 
with HIV risks and their sex and PrEP practi ces so as to support their contextualized medication 
needs for adherence.  
As PrEP is a preventive medication  for individuals who are aware of their risks for HIV, it is 
important to understand potential PrEP users’ practices, needs, challenges, and demand ed support 
when taking PrEP to design technological mediations that help them reduce HIV infection while 
sustaining their medication from a human -centered perspective. On the other hand, it is possible 
that relying on behavioral change models that pivot in dividual -level variables like motivations, 
attitudes, or self -efficacy [1, 6, 7, 74]  is not enough to engage people in practicing “preventive 
medication” that requir es complex adherence order when they do not live with HIV.  
There have been initiatives in the public health field to support and sustain risk -prone 
populations’ PrEP medication and adherence through technological mediation, such as 
applications on mobile phones [9, 35, 41, 53, 61, 82, 91] . However, desp ite the prevalence of these 
mobile health (mHealth) applications, not all technological solutions are based on the perspective 
of human -centered design. Also, research indicates that a human -centered perspective is less 
offered from non -western contexts [92]. Additionally, most mHealth technologies that susta in 
PrEP medication mostly feature “individual use” (e.g., [9, 41] ). Therefore, despite the initiatives,Understanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:3 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. research still found challenges for users to adhere to and sustain their PrEP use (e.g., [79, 90] ). To 
address the issue and draw on the CSCW angle, our study proposes to use the social ecological 
model to investigate influences at multiple levels, including individua l, interpersonal, and 
sociocultural [13, 50]  for technological designs.  
Another identified gap in the existing research revolving around PrEP support focuses on the 
inhibitors or enablers of medication uptake as “intentions” instead of “actual behaviors” [10, 27, 
39, 59, 79, 90] . Therefore, the existing technological support is mostly geared towards individuals’ 
medication compliance [44], access  to HIV testing and medication services [45], or HIV awareness 
[33]. We propose to take a step forward and investigate users’ cur rent medication taking 
behaviors so as to inform how technologies can support and sustain the behaviors to effectively 
reduce HIV risks.  
To differentiate intentions from behaviors in our research context is important because PrEP  
medication taking depends on users’ sex practices and their partners’ HIV and/or medication 
status [91]. The medication styles can be categorized into event -driven and daily styles. To 
maintain a consistent and safe level of protection, daily PrEP demands users take one pill per day, 
preferably at the same time; event -driven PrEP requires users to take t wo pills two to 24 hours 
prior to sex, one pill 24 hours post the double dose, and another one 24 hours after that. It is 
possible that users, especially those with no regular sex partners, cannot predict when to have 
sex and take pills at the right time, or they may switch between medication styles and mess up 
the routine. In other words, for individuals already on medication, the kinds of support they need 
should be behavioral instead of strengthening intentions or enhancing awareness.  
With a qualitative interview study (n = 22), our study makes several contributions to sexual 
health in the CSCW literature. Our work is among the first to examine the behavioral practices 
of MSM who are currently taking preventive PrEP medication regimens in the northeast As ia for 
the purpose of HIV prevention. To go beyond individual practices and introduce social support, 
we also leverage the theoretical framework of the social ecological model to analyze the enablers, 
inhibitors, challenges, and needs at the individual, in terpersonal, and sociocultural levels of 
MSM’s medication adoption and intended retention. Last, we propose theory -driven discussions 
and human -centered design implications for future mHealth technologies based on our 
understandings of the target users’ pr actices and needs.  
2 RELATED WORKS  
2.1 Supporting the Populations Living with HIV Risks  
Advanced preventive medication regimens have been developed to combat HIV, PrEP is one of 
which for individuals living with high risks but not yet HIV infected. As a pr eventive medication, 
studies argue that the effectiveness of PrEP is contingent upon people’s willingness to accept and 
adhere to it; otherwise, PrEP availability and effectiveness may not achieve its intended efforts to 
contain HIV [30]. The tricky p art with this medication is that it comes in high variance among 
individuals, depending on their sex practices, the number of their partners, and their partners’ 
HIV and/or medication status. To maintain a sufficient level of medication concentration in th e 
blood, individuals need to take the pills prior to sexual intercourse [30]. However, it can be 
challenging when users need to: 1) adjust between daily and event -driven medication depending 
on their sex practices; 2) find and stick to the right time to take the pills; and 3) make sure they 
are protected fully by the pills when having sex [91].310:4   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. Relev ant research endeavors focused on perceived facilitators and barriers among “potential 
users” and identified factors such as long -term health consequences and short -term side effects, 
drug resistance, stigma from sex partners, or concerns over its effectiv eness as key barriers to 
uptake “intentions” [10, 27, 30, 3 9, 59, 79, 90] . On the other hand, other public health research has 
identified free medication, access to medical support, the intention of protecting oneself against 
HIV, and the associated enjoyment of condomless sex as key facilitators [27, 30, 39, 90] . Another 
angle from the executive level is to inform health literacy programs, policy making, or front -line 
clinical practices [30, 59] . Some recent works have started to investigate actual practices around 
PrEP, such as MSM’s online sexual communication about PrEP and their uncertainty management  
regarding their PrEP -taking conditions, information about PrEP, and the associated stigma of 
using PrEP [35] or how PrEP users de signated social values and used discourses to describe PrEP 
practices [67]. Relatively few empirical studies have covered actual PrEP users’ needs and 
practices from a user -centered design perspe ctive for mHealth technology designs. This gives us 
a unique research advantage by examining users’ current medication practices, as it can best 
inform the development of technologies that support and sustain the medication.  
2.2 Issues and mHealth Support for Sexual Health Related to HIV  
Sexual health, especially related to HIV, has been gaining academic attention in HCI. Highly 
active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) transformed HIV from a life -threatening disease into a 
chronic living condition with which p eople living with HIV need to deal for life. The success and 
effectiveness of HAART heavily rely on people’s long -term commitment and adherence to the 
medication [37]. Therefore, many mHealth int erventions for people living with HIV have featured 
medication adherence and personal medication management based on research in public health 
and medical domains [46, 86]  because unsuccessful treatment adherence has been identified as 
the key factor to treatment failure, hospitalization, opportunistic infections, drug resistance, HIV 
progression, or incre ased morbidity and mortality [34, 86] . The characteristics of these tools 
include using pervasive technologies with tailored short message services, audio visual 
notification systems, serious gaming features, or social networking functions to motivate and 
support medication reminders and adherence [23, 36, 86] . However, research also pointed out that 
technologies that overlooked users’ needs at the  socio -cultural level, such as disclosing users’ 
HIV status with attention -drawing notification alarms in public [63] or using HIV -related 
stigmatized language and visual signs on user interface [66] can lead to non -use and reduce 
adhenrence.  
On top of medication adherence and management support, works in HCI/CSCW have started 
to integrate users’ socio -cultural needs by investigating how people living with HIV share 
personal data and relevant informa tion or offer emotional and social support with one another 
through personal tracking and social networking functions (e.g., [15, 25, 65, 84] ). Privacy and trust 
emerged as salient issues for people living with HIV to share their information with community 
members [15], potential sex partners [84], or health professionals [55]. Others featured support 
for users to go through different stages of HIV as users’ needs and practices may var y [16, 65]  or 
for users to reflect on contextual cues that connect personal tracking behaviors and medication 
reactions for adherence [64]. 
Among the socio -cultural factors, HIV -related stigma is a multidimensional issue that is often 
associated with marginalized behaviors, such as careless drug use, casual sex behaviors, and 
homosexuality [32]. Therefore, serostatus disclosure may cause people to develop mental health 
issues like depression and anxiety due to anticipated/perceived/internalized discrimination,Understanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:5 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. stereotyping, prejudice, or social rejection [54, 73] . A tension in online contexts may arise 
between the negotiation of maintaining privacy and disclosing HIV status due to HIV -related 
stigma [18]. The consequences of misreporting or concealing HIV status due t o stigma include 
increasing HIV transmission rates, reducing social support, and hampering treatment adherence 
[58, 73, 84] .  
Several intervention  programs have been designed to ameliorate HIV -related stigma, such as 
information -based approaches (e.g., brochures), skills building (e.g., via sessions or workshops), 
as well as counseling or support [14]. As people living with HIV encounter stigma at the 
convergence of ethnic identity, sexual orientation, gender, sociocultural norms about characters, 
and behaviors [4], a meta -analysis recognized that many interventions oversimplified stigma by 
only focusing on a single domain of stigma (e.g., fear of infection from casual contact with people 
living with HIV or punitive laws) or a uni -dimensional level of intervention (e.g., skills building) 
without taking the social and ecological contexts into consideration to address HIV -related stigma 
from a holistic angle [68].  
HCI research has also started to address the issue of stigma through creating public awareness 
as a par t of educational programs via crowdsourcing at the public level [40] or highlighting users’ 
needs for privacy, trust, and intimacy in the technology designs at the individual level. And 
researchers focused on the stigmatized and marginalized situations with which the users living 
with  HIV or HIV risks faced and how to provide a more private and trustworthy mediated 
information environment for them [46, 55, 84] , examples of which were thro ugh empathy -driven 
designs [48] or value -sensitive designs for empowering and customized technologies [46].  
In addition to users living with HIV, studies have starte d to address users exposed to HIV risks 
through preventive measures. Different information technologies, such as off -the-shelf geosocial 
network applications (e.g., Grindr) [61, 82]  or research -based mobile applications [9, 35, 71, 91]  
are leveraged to assist participants with  personal tracking and provide recommendations for PrEP 
medication suggestions, relevant information about HIV test s, nearby HIV testing and PrEP care 
sites, as well as test kits, condoms, and lube ordering. Other technologies are used to support 
healthcare professionals to protect patients’ information privacy and send reminders, which 
enhance medication compliance [44, 55] . Research reviewed how  users sought HIV -related 
information from a wide range of mobile applications and websites and found that these online 
resources often provided cookie -cutter information without taking the breadth and complexity of 
user needs into consideration [65]. According to a meta -analysis, the higher the level of mHealth 
technology customization and the more advanced the designs of the employed technology, the 
more effective the application [92].  
However, while there was a slew of mediated HIV support, relatively few technologies are 
designed for PrEP care from a multi -level, user -centered perspective. Researchers also pointed out 
that there was an apparent gap in the past literature regarding a la ck of empirical studies 
contextualized in non -western countries for people exposed to HIV risks [47, 92] . This gap may 
inhibit a better understanding of how mHealth technologies mediate HIV prevention practices 
around the world.  
The current technological solutions for HIV in the broad sense, or PrEP use to be specific, rely 
mostly on an individual user’s personal health management (e.g., [16, 65, 84] ). To raise awareness, 
encourage adoption, and sustain use, a multi -level approach that includes individual, 
interpersonal, and sociocultural influences for supporting individuals ’ mediated PrEP practices is 
needed. In accordance with the call for a well -rounded intervention program that integrates 
individual and social levels to address issues like HIV -related stigma for medication adherence [4,310:6   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. 68], our study proposes to use the social ec ological model to not only contextualize MSM’s 
individual practices but also integrate interpersonal and sociocultural influences so as to develop 
theory -driven designs for preventive practices around PrEP.  
2.3 The Social Ecological Model: A CSCW Focus for Supporting MSM and Their PrEP 
Practices  
To promote and sustain medication adherence, many theoretical models can be applied, with a 
general emphasis on aligning individual factors such as cognition, motivation,  or self -efficacy 
with people’s complying behaviors [1]. For example, the Information, Motivation, Behavioral 
Skills model (IMB) suggests that relevant HIV knowledge and  HIV treatment information can 
pave for correspondent skills of behavioral practices and facilitate medication adherence [52]. 
Studies that drew on Bandura’s Social Cognitive Theory showed that people’s self -efficacy and 
knowledge about behavioral impacts on health can scaffold medication adherence [74]. Factors 
like perceived susceptibility, severity, and barriers to engaging in HIV -preventive behaviors from 
the Health Belief Model were found to significantly predict HIV medical adherence [6].  
As PrEP is a preven tive HIV measure for uninfected individuals, research has pointed out that 
it may be difficult to convince these target users to adhere to the medication, and there can be 
usage fatigue as time passes by [56]. This suggests that solely rely ing on individuals’ efforts to 
drive medication uptake and retention is not enough and points to the importance of examining 
different levels of inhibiting and enabling factors posed to the target population and potential 
supports to facilitate their medic ation adoption and adherence. On the other hand, technologies 
with persuasive intent for health causes are usually designed for a specific group of users with a 
single persuasive strategy that may make it challenging to sustain users’ behaviors for desirab le 
practices in the long run [31]. HIV risks are evidenced to come in different levels [4, 68] , which 
warrants the need for a multi -level theoretical framework to guide the empirical research and 
technological designs to characterize HIV prevention  practices by MSM. We propose to leverage 
the theoretical framework of the social ecological model that integrates individual, interpersonal, 
and sociocultural levels of influences [13, 50]  for individuals’ PrEP promotion.  
The social ecological model argues that sustaining health -related behaviors should go beyond 
individual responsibility and effort s; instead, individuals’ behaviors are couched on and can affect 
other stakeholders in the individuals’ social network and the broader socio -cultural contexts [13, 
50]. According to the social ecological model, the following aspects are all crucial parts of the 
ecological system that influence individuals’ health -related practices: 1) individual aspe cts, such 
as people’s knowledge, attitudes, skills, or behaviors; 2) interpersonal aspects, such as interactions 
with one’s immediate informal and formal networks, including family members, close friends, or 
colleagues; and 3) sociocultural contexts in whi ch individuals and their social networks are 
embedded.  
The individual aspects in the social ecological model are captured by many prior theories like 
IMB. What’s different is that they are suggested to intersect with the higher -order interpersonal 
and soc iocultural levels, which represent influences outside of individual control [8]. The 
interpersonal aspects may include various types of social relationships (e.g., familial, sexual, 
romantic, drug -using) via social (including sexual) engagements that people can encounter [8]. 
The sociocultural contexts refer to physical or virtual communities and environments that shape 
the norms or values where health may be cultivated [85]. Other scholars further specified that the 
sociocultural contexts may include soci al, economic, organizational, and political influences that 
contribute to social inequities, such as HIV -related stigma [32, 73] . To better leverage the socialUnderstanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:7 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. ecological model as a lens, resea rchers suggest that it is necessary to use the framework in a 
specified and contextualized issue for appropriate interventions [8, 60] .  
The social ecological model has been widely applied in investigating people’s health behaviors, 
such as young adults’ exercise and diet practices [80], users’ technology adoptions, such as older 
adults’ dispositions towards technology [81], or people’s privacy concerns online [75]. Since PrEP 
taking is essentially contingent upon users’ own self -protection intention, their sex partner(s)’ 
conditions, and the socio -cultural contexts in which they live, there is potential to use the theory 
to empirically examine how multiple levels of influences may intertwine to affect users’ PrEP 
practices and inform human -centered designs. Previous studies revolving around HIV 
interventions that used the social ecological model have focused on risk factors or policy change 
at different levels [8, 29] . Guided by the theoretical lens, our study intends to better understand 
the holistic practices beyond risk factors of MSM who use PrEP as a preventive strategy against 
HIV.  
This echoes a recent research trend in CSCW/HCI that integrates influences from social 
relationships for health promotion by extending individual awareness about their health sta tus 
and bringing in closed ones, such as family members, to complement and support individual 
health practices. For example, health information sharing was encouraged to be collaborated 
across generations between elderly parents and adult children to promo te a culture of health in 
the family [11]. To prevent gig workers like taxi or uber drivers from long -hour overwork without 
paying attention to their day -to-day mental and physical health state, research proposed to 
incorporate social influences from spouse to address downsides in personal tracking, such as 
biased data interpretation, restricted awareness of data monitoring, and limited motivation to act 
on tracking data [93]. Collaborative health and well -being have received much scholarly attention 
in CSCW. Our study intends to leverage the lens and broaden the scope of dyadic interactions by 
examining how sexual health is practiced among MSM users with HIV risks at individu al, 
interpersonal, and sociocultural levels. More specifically, we try to uncover factors that enable or 
inhibit MSM users’ PrEP medication, their perceived risks and challenges during the practices, as 
well as desired support.  
3 METHODS  
3.1 Researcher Sel f-Disclosure  
The research team led by the third author has established a long -term partnership with two 
medical centers in two major cities (Taipei and Tainan) in Taiwan that have thorough experience 
in providing PrEP medication services from which our par ticipants were recruited. The doctors 
and the case managers helped relay research information to eligible and interested participants 
and referred the ones who signed the informed consent to us. To protect the participants’ privacy, 
the first author handle d user research without accessing the participants’ identifiable 
demographic information, and the second author generated user -centered designs based on the 
results.  
3.2 Participants and Procedure  
A purposive sample of 22 male participants who have sex wit h other males residing in Taiwan 
was recruited from the two medical centers and screened to determine eligibility. Potential 
participants went to the medical centers to get either a PrEP consultation or medication. Inclusion310:8   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. criteria specified that partici pants be male, at least 20 years of age, tested negative for HIV, have 
laboratory results eligible to initiate PrEP based on guidelines under CDC of Taiwan, currently 
take the medication or be willing to initiate it after enrollment, and report having at l east four 
episodes of anal intercourses with men in the previous one month. The case managers first 
identified potential participants for our research team and explained the research purposes to 
them. Eligible and interested individuals were referred from the two medical centers to our team 
and scheduled for an interview. After participants provided informed consent at the medical 
centers, we received contact information from the case managers, including the name/alias (three 
out of 22 people provided their  real name, and others used an alias) and the instant messaging 
(IM) contact information for interview scheduling. The IM tool that we used was LINE (popular 
in Taiwan) for additional protection of our participants’ privacy. Unlike Facebook Messenger, 
LINE  does not request users to display their real names.  
In other words, we did not require the participants to give us their name or other personally 
identifiable information (e.g., job) during the interview stage to protect the participants’ privacy. 
Working  with case managers for recruitment allowed us to ensure that the participants felt safe 
and secure when having in -depth interviews with us. This also raised their motivation and 
intention for their research participation. Note that the participants could still decide not to have 
the interview even after giving informed consent at the medical centers. However, we only had 
one case with whom we failed to schedule an interview.  
Each voluntary participant joined in an in -depth interview lasting approximately 60 minutes. 
After the interview, we ensured the participants that all data were anonymized to protect their 
confidentiality. All participants received a compensation of NTD$1,000 (roughly USD$34) for 
their participation. The compensation, along with the re ceipt, was handled by our collaborating 
case managers. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of (Removed for 
anonymous review) University (IRB number: removed for anonymous review).  
Among our interviewees (ages ranged from 20 to 39 with a mean of 28.08 and a SD of 4.17), 14 
were on the event -driven regimen and 8 were on the daily regimen by the time we conducted our 
interview. Upon having the interview, their length of medication use ranged from 1 week to 2 –3 
years.  
Interviews were conduc ted by the first author, an experienced qualitative interviewer and co -
investigator of the study. The interviews were conducted either face -to-face (n = 3) at the office 
of the first author or via audio chat (n = 19), depending on the interviewee’s prefere nce. A semi -
structured interview protocol was used to guide the in -depth interview, which included questions 
regarding the following topics: 1) their motivations for participating in the government program 
(e.g., “How do you learn about the PrEP program? W hat motivates you to participate?”); 2) their 
experience with the regimen (e.g., “Which regimen are you on right now? Have you ever switched 
between styles? Why?”); 3) the issues they encountered during the medication period (e.g., “Can 
you share with me i f you have encountered any challenges regarding PrEP taking?”); 4) their 
relationships with their partner(s) and the medical staff (e.g., what kinds of roles did the doctor 
and the case managers play? How often do you interact with them? In what ways? Can you share 
your relationship status with me?); and 5) how the relationships affected their medication 
adoption (e.g., “How do you think it affects your PrEP taking?”). We also asked relevant follow -
up questions depending on each interviewee’s experience. Fo r example, when we designed the 
protocol, we did not specifically include questions about how our participants’ regular partner 
who was diagnosed HIV positive and if they were in long -distance relationships changed their 
PrEP -taking styles. During the inte rview with our participants, we found that these two issuesUnderstanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:9 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. were actually key factors. Therefore, we asked questions about the influences of having a 
committed partner living with HIV and a long -distance relationship. Then we included relevant 
questions fo r the subsequent interviewees who happened to be in the same situation.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. An illustration of our coding processes.  
3.3 Analysis  
We audio -recorded and transcribed all interviews. Then the first author used Atlas.ti, a qualitative 
analysis tool for managing, integrating, and analyzing qualitative data, to conduct thematic 
analysis using a bottom -up approach [12], focusing on the collective and shared meanings of the 
data (see Figure 1). During the first round of open coding, we read the transcripts closely to extrac t 
and assign codes to meaningful quotes across the transcripts. At this stage, more than 200 codes 
were assigned for around 800 quotes in the data. This extensive list of codes and their definitions 
was derived from the interview guide, interviewer notes, and multiple readings of the transcripts. 
Then, during rounds of iterative coding, we clustered and collapsed similar codes so that they 
converged to form a pattern of salient themes. Last, the final 56 codes describing enabling (e.g., 
the number of sex pa rtners) and inhibiting factors (e.g., negative public perceptions and stigma 
associated with PrEP), risks and challenges (e.g., self -related risks; perceptions about medication 
precision), and desired support (e.g., informational; executive; emotional supp orts) map onto the 
individual, interpersonal, and sociocultural levels. As all themes gradually stabilized, the multi -
level theme structure related to the social ecological model emerged. This has guided our axial 
coding to connect the meaningful themes wi th the theoretical framework [88], which we report 
in the following section.  
4 RESULTS  
Four major themes emerged from our data analysis, including 1) enabling factors of users’ 
medication adoption, 2) inhibiting factors, 3) associated risks and challenges, and 4) the kinds of 
support they had, all of which presented sources from the individu al, interpersonal, and 
sociocultural levels using the framework  of the social ecological model (see Table 1).310:10   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023.  
Table 1. Four Major Themes Related to Preventive Medication Adoption Across the Individual, Interpersonal, 
and Sociocultural Levels  
 Individual level  Interpersonal level  Sociocultural level  
Enabling 
Factors  • High perceived risks  
• Enhanced protection  • Relational influences, 
such as partners or 
friends  • Socially constructed 
notions of being gay and 
a high perceived 
susceptibility to HIV  
Inhibiting 
Factors  • Doubt about 
effectiveness  
• The monetary cost of 
PrEP  • Other people’s negative 
impressions toward self, 
online and offline  • Negative stereotypes 
and stigma about STIs 
and HIV  
Risks and 
Challenges  • Unstable medication 
routines  
• Difficult to remember 
when and how to stay 
properly medicated  • Serendipitous sexual 
intercourses increase 
the difficulty to follow 
the event -driven 
regimen  • Access to PrEP is still 
limited  
• The cultural issue to 
openly promote PrEP  
• Urban -rural gap  
Supports  • A reminder mechanism 
to take the pill and to 
record  • Emotional support  
• Informational support  
• Executive support from 
the healthcare 
professionals  
• Favor human 
communication due to 
privacy issues  • Willing to build better 
awareness and more 
participation in 
comm unity  
 
4.1 Enabling Factors of PrEP Adoption  
We have identified several sources of enabling factors that contribute to users’ PrEP adoption. 
From the ind ividual level, the major motivation that drove our participants’ decision to join the 
medication program was a high perceived risk for HIV. When having sex with other men, our 
participants reported engaging in unsafe sex, such as hooking up without condoms  or with 
unfamiliar or multiple partners at times. Taking medication ensured a sense of security and more 
opportunities and flexibility for sex.  
“[taking PrEP] mattered psychologically. I think I am safe during the period [on PrEP]. I 
feel more secure whe n having sex. More people are willing to have sex with me when they 
know that I am on PrEP. They feel more assured having sex without condoms with me…I 
am also more open to hooking up with others. But I won’t demand others be on PrEP too. 
[why is that?] Pr EP is not easy to come by. How can I ask others to be on it?” (M08)  
While some of our participants considered that taking medication allowed them to have 
unprotected sex, others regarded the medication as additional protection because it does not 
shield th em against other sexually transmitted infections (STIs).Understanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:11 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. “I am aware that it only prevents HIV but not other STIs. So I won’t go condom -less. PrEP 
is just additional protection. I know that if I use condoms and PrEP at the same time, I am 
practically safe… some people think that since they have condoms, they don’t have to take 
PrEP, and vice versa. For me, I hope to have double protection.” (M02)  
At the interpersonal level, the enabling factors that help shape our participants’ medication 
adoption are associ ated with their partners. For participants who were committed to a regular 
partner with health conditions like HIV, not only they but also their partners were exposed to 
risks if they were not properly medicated. Moreover, our participants pointed out that  joining the 
program enhanced a sense of empathy towards their partners who live with HIV and even 
improved their relationships.  
“I think I rely on PrEP more in a psychological way. I can wear condoms all the 
time…We’ve been like this all these years. It’s  not like condoms won’t work all of a sudden. 
But as for me, I shoulder the pressure of ensuring his health and safety. I think I need PrEP 
very much. It’s like I have extra equipment to keep him away from being infected for a 
hundred percent. It’s very im portant to me…It’s one thing with other infections, but HIV 
is no joke.” (M16)  
Some participants pointed out that knowing someone who was HIV infected may also prompt 
the related network to join the program.  
“We knew that one of our friends who used to hook up with us was actually infected. We 
were shocked. So people in our network started to take PrEP. And this small group of mine 
is really close, and we trust one another. We went to the clinic together.” (M12)  
From a sociocultural level, the socially constructed notion of being “gay” as well as the 
vulnerable and sometimes stigmat ic implications that come from the sexual orientation have 
affected our participants with respect to their perceived susceptibility to STIs or HIV. Note here 
that our participants were not necessarily invested in internalizing these sexual stereotypes; 
nevertheless, they were surrounded by them and might be affected. Therefore, with PrEP, they 
feel more protected or capable of getting rid of lurking risks.  
“I think PrEP was a revolutionary lifesaver for me. I used to have a fear of HIV…I always 
thought that  I would get that and die someday. [why did you think so?] It’s probably a 
deep -rooted sense of homophobia. I was very sacred. I didn’t trust anonymous HIV testing. 
It’s not that testing was bad, but it’s like drawing raffles. There’s no 100% guarantee. So  
you know to wear condoms, but things happen. Using PrEP raises my living hope. I think 
at least I won’t die…you see, there are so many literary works that tell you how horrible 
HIV is, like ‘Rent’ or ‘The Normal Heart’…” (M16)  
In general, the enabling fa ctors of PrEP adoption were associated with participants’ 
experienced risks and potential infection associated with their own sexual behaviors at the 
individual level and their partner’s condition at the interpersonal level. The sociocultural 
perceptions a bout their sexual orientation and HIV infection also prompt our participants to feel 
positive about taking the medication, which enhances their sense of security.310:12   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. 4.2 Inhibiting Factors of PrEP Adoption  
Despite the enabling factors, our participants also m entioned several inhibiting factors that may 
pull them back from disclosing or even sustaining PrEP use. At the individual level, some of our 
participants pointed out that they were still concerned about the effectiveness of PrEP.  
“I’m still full of questions because I don’t know how effective it can be. There are so many 
descriptions telling me it can protect me against HIV. But I am not sure if it’s 100% ... the 
nurse told me that there were cases where people still got HIV despite  PrEP use. ” (M08)  
Also, the cost of taking the medication can be a hindrance to the participants, especially if the 
brand -name drug is expensive were it not for the government subsidy. Some participants 
mentioned they might not be able to afford it after t he program ends. Our participants revealed 
that even though there are sources to get generic drugs, they are still concerned about the 
effectiveness of generic drugs.  
“If I need to pay for the drug myself, I think I would do event -driven. After all, it’s 
expensive… but I think it’s most safe and secure to do it daily.” (M04)  
“I care about the actual effect and the concentration between the proprietary and the 
generic drugs…But I am not sure how to verify that.” (M08)  
At the interpersonal level, our partici pants pointed out that taking the medication may 
influence their impression management both online and offline. In terms of offline impressions, 
when taking the medication in front of others, our participants mentioned they might need to 
explain why they h ad them and if they wanted to engage in unprotected sex with others. Or they 
might be erroneously perceived to live with HIV or have partners who live with HIV. Several 
participants (e.g., M01, M11, and M16) who were in a mutually consented open relationsh ip with 
their partner told us that they avoided taking the medication in front of their partner because it 
indicated potential hook -ups with others.  
“Many people would think that you’re up to something bad…you’re doing condomless sex. 
To me, it’s difficult  to seriously explain how the medication works. In the beginning, when 
I was taking PrEP, I didn’t realize what other people thought. I found out that I had to 
explain this to others… people thought I was HIV infected…and questioned why I was on 
PrEP.” (M0 2) 
In terms of online impressions, some of our participants who used dating applications told us 
that disclosing their PrEP use was associated with connotations like consenting to condomless 
and other unsafe sex on some dating applications. Other participa nts tended to avoid such 
disclosure and the associated negative implications.  
“I felt like #PrEP was used as a code for condomless sex…The medication is a good thing 
that protects people. It has become a prevalent hashtag [on dating apps]…who knows if 
it’s true [that others are really on PrEP].” (M11)  
These negative impressions associated with PrEP use at the interpersonal level can be 
attributed to stigma and stereotypical discourses revolving around homosexual orientation and 
HIV infections, as reported i n 4.1 at the broader sociocultural level. Moreover, this stigma and 
stereotypes may even influence people’s perceptions and willingness about PrEP acquisition at 
hospital because acquiring the medication and getting STI treatment are handled by the same 
division. While our participants generally concurred with the positive effects of PrEP, they alsoUnderstanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:13 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. saw how the medication was stigmatized by people who were not familiar with the effects of the 
medicine.  
“It’s like what happened in the past when we didn’t kno w how to open up for STI and HIV 
testing. If I go to the hospital, how do I ask around if I can participate in the PrEP program? 
Or when there’s no one around who’s in the program or openly talks about it…and the 
access to PrEP is through the Division of I nfectious Diseases…and you know how people 
would judge you if you visit the division. That bothered me once…” (M02)  
Other people talked about if such stigma and the widespread negative impressions may cause 
the government to filibuster the policy and cut s hort the subsidy.  
“the released program quota [for people who can attend the program] always runs out 
quickly, but I believe there are still people who don’t know what PrEP is or the importance 
of it. This can cause the prevalence of HIV infection…I am of the doubt that…with so much 
government subsidy, if more people learn about the program, homophobes may think 
we’re wasting the national health insurance funding.” (M06)  
In sum, the inhibiting factors of PrEP adoption include the concerns over its effective ness and 
its price at the individual level; the balance between self -disclosure and impression management 
of medication taking online and offline at the interpersonal level; and associated negative 
implications about PrEP taking at the sociocultural level.  
4.3 Risks and Challenges  
Medication style emerges as an important theme in our data, which may incur potential risks and 
challenges for our participants to fully make the most of PrEP and stay properly protected. To be 
eligible for the government subsidy,  the participants were required to stick to the daily regimen. 
In practice, our participants’ medication taking patterns are associated with their sexual 
behaviors, the frequency, and how well they perceive being protected. Those with more partners 
and mor e hookup opportunities tend to be on daily medication instead of an event -driven 
regimen. We found that many of our participants used the metaphors of “saving” or “being 
economical” to describe the mismatch between the required daily regimen and their sexu al 
intercourse protection.  
“To be honest, although I have a pretty active sex life, they’re all safe. A friend of mine 
engages in condomless sex very often. I think daily PrEP for him is likely a good deal. I 
wear a condom pretty much every time, but I am  on daily medication and consume a lot 
of pills, which makes me feel less cost -effective.” (M14)  
For those who do not have frequent sexual intercourse, they do not want to take medicine 
daily. Some participants did so because of the side effects of dizzine ss or nausea; others chose to 
switch to the event -driven style due to the perception of a lack of necessity.  
“[why did you switch from daily to event -driven?] I just thought that I didn’t do 
anything…why would I have to stay medicated? I think in the long term, it could be a 
burden to my body…I choose to take it when I need it.” (M11)  
However, challenges still arise from taking the event -driven medication routine, especially if 
the participants experienced switching from the daily to the event -driven regime n. For those who310:14   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. were having event -driven PrEP, following closely how many and when they (should be) 
medicated was a challenge. Even so, it could be difficult for the participants to keep track of their 
recommended medicine concentration, as M10 mentioned.  
“I’d make up the pills. At least to maintain a certain level of concentration, even just for 
the sake of peace of mind.” (M10)  
While some participants were like M07, who chose to take PrEP daily to rid themselves of the 
burden of remembering when and how to stay properly medicated, other participants chose to 
take it event -driven but found it difficult to follow the routine. On the individual level, having the 
event -driven regimen not only increases the difficulty for our participants to recall how and whe n 
to take their medicine but also lowers the precision in following medical orders to maintain the 
right level of medication concentration. On the interpersonal level, for both participants, with or 
without a regular partner, the serendipitous sexual inter courses increase the difficulty of 
following the event -driven regimen.  
“[having a long -distance relationship with his partner] I think it’s really troublesome, so I 
go daily because I forget if I took medicine or not. It’s not natural to request me to take  
medicine two hours prior to sex. Who would have the time [to plan for that]?” (M07)  
“I am on the event -driven regimen. I don’t necessarily have sex every day. But the trickiest 
thing with the event -driven style is that I have to take two pills two hours b efore sex, one 
pill 24 and 48 hours after sex, respectively. Sometimes it occurred to me that I hadn’t taken 
my meds right or on time.” (M01)  
The sociocultural challenge for PrEP adoption is awareness and access. Our participants 
pointed out that the curre nt promotion of and access to the medication are not well received by 
the target audience in Taiwan, which M02 attributed to cultural influences. M06 instead pointed 
out that there was less media exposure for people who needed it to gain enough awareness o f this 
alternative preventive protection. But other participants, like M04, considered that the urban -
rural divide of PrEP promotion and access was also an issue.  
“PrEP has been popular abroad. I think we Asians are too conservative to actively promote 
it. It's not common enough.” (M02)  
“I think there are too few channels to promote PrEP.  People in Taiwan are becoming more 
and more open to our [sexual] identity. I don’t know whether it’s public perception or 
whether the hospital does not promote it well enough. Very few of my friends know what 
PrEP is. No one is sharing it on Facebook or o ther social media. They don’t know where to 
access the information. I think this is the most needed part for PrEP.” (M06)  
“I talked to my case manager, and she told me the quota in A city [the major metropolitan 
area] ran out quickly. I live in B City [a s econd -tier county in the middle part of Taiwan], 
and I was the first person who enrolled in the program. Now you see the urban -rural gap.” 
(M04)  
To sum up, the individual -level risk and challenge to the medication adoption is a difficulty in 
taking the med icine correctly, especially the event -driven style. It is sometimes out of sync to 
couple sexual intercourses and medication taking together to maintain the right protection level 
at the interpersonal level, especially for those in open relationships. At t he sociocultural level, the 
community and society as a whole do not promote enough awareness of and access to this 
preventive medication for people exposed to risks, which can hinder the normalization of the 
medication.Understanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:15 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023.  
 
4.4 Supports  
In response to the indi vidual -level challenge, the type of support they need at the individual level 
is a reminder mechanism that closely connects their medication times, sexual behaviors, and 
recordings. While some participants relied on fixed medication times to help them esta blish a 
routine to take medicine, such as during breakfast, with meals, or before bedtime, other 
participants reported that they used different tools to remind them of taking pills, such as setting 
alarms, using Google Calendar, or a schedule book. For exa mple, M22 and his partner live in 
different cities, and they tune in to set the alarm at the same time. M12 told us that it was easy to 
forget when to take medicine if switching between styles. He also relied on his daily routine to 
help him get back on tr ack during switches.  
“One of us lives in A City [the northern part of Taiwan] and the other in B City [the 
southern part of Taiwan]. We set the alarm at the same time. Like me, I take my 
medications every day, so it’s a routine. But he only takes it when m eeting me. If we’re at 
the same location at that specific time, our alarms will go off concurrently.” (M22)  
Not just remembering to take medicine but also recording it takes time to establish the routine. 
To participate in the government -subsidized program , our participants needed to fill out a daily 
online report about their medication practices. But M15 pointed out that it was highly possible 
that they forgot to report because the relevance between medicine use and going online to 
document the use was wea k. 
“PrEP  use is not necessarily followed by prompt reporting. It’s possible that you took 
medicine but forgot to fill in the journal. The connection…the relevance between the two 
behaviors was low.” (M15)  
At the interpersonal level, our participants reported that they acquired support from the doctor 
and the case manager with respect to the emotional, informational, and executive perspectives. 
In terms of the emotional perspective, our participants mostly referred to how the doctor and the 
case manager helped ease the potential negative stereotypes associated with their sexual 
behaviors and the tense feelings brought on by visiting the Infectious Disease Division at the 
hospital.  
“The hospital that I visit is a gender -friendly one. They’re very nice. You won’t feel 
discriminated. Besides, the process is smooth and quick. The doctor would care for your 
relationship status…if it’s stable…From checking in to leaving the hospital, it won’t take 
more than half an hour.” (M01)  
For informational support, our participants me ntioned that, compared with online information 
seeking, they preferred the direct and efficient answers from the doctor or the case manager (e.g., 
M22). They usually used tools like instant messaging to communicate. But some participants 
mentioned that it was possible that the case managers might not reply in time. As for the 
executive level, our participants all pointed out that the most common type of support provided 
by the case manager is reminders of completing the medicine -taking report online and mak ing a 
return visit on time (e.g., M05).310:16   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. “We know that it’s easy to search for information online. But it’s not 100% correct. When 
you have a case manager to consult, why not just ask these experienced professionals more 
in-depth questions? It’s certainly m ore helpful.” (M22)  
“They would care whether you eat the medicine right and remind me of my return visit.” 
(M05)  
We also noticed that privacy issues present as a delicate part to our participants when it comes 
to interpersonal -level support. They pointed o ut that there was more trust when interacting with 
the doctor and the case manager because they needed to disclose personal information to obtain 
help from the professionals. However, they are concerned about recording such information in 
online systems du e to potential security and confidentiality breaches.  
“I don’t think there’s anything to conceal, which would be bad for me. If I don’t tell them 
the truth, they can’t give me good advice. Might as well just open up.” (M06)  
“like google…if I connect thing s with the cloud or whatever, people can find it if they want 
to.” (M13)  
Last, PrEP adoption can be facilitated by sociocultural level support; however, currently, the 
MSM community and society as a whole are not fostering awareness and promoting adoption at 
a larger scale, which also echoes the sociocultural -level challenges. Some of our participants 
pointed out that they were willing to be part of the force that motivated the change for better 
awareness and more participation in the community or even gove rnment policy -making.  
“The government required all participants to maintain a certain level of concentration 
when we had the check -up; otherwise, we wouldn’t get the medicine subsidy. How could 
you just switch to the event -driven style? If we don’t persist , it will be a failed case [to the 
program]. We can’t influence the subsequent policy -making.” (M04)  
In sum, the individual -level support our participants need is assistance with recording and 
reminding them of medicine use. The interpersonal support, incl uding information, emotional 
comfort, and executive assistance, came from the doctors and the case managers. Last, our 
participants are positive about PrEP and willing to shape the sociocultural support for others to 
join in.  
5 DISCUSSIONS  
From the perspec tive of supporting sexual health, our findings demonstrated that MSM’s practice 
around PrEP is a theoretically rich and practically meaningful field well worth more nuanced 
scholarly consideration. While the original social ecological model indicated that the success of 
health intervention is based on individual, interpersonal, and contextual factors [13, 50] , our 
findings further demonstrated that these levels of influences shape the enablers, inhibitors, risks 
and challenges, and support towards MSM’s preventive medication use against HIV (see Table 1). 
Our findings contextualize the application of the social ecological model by identifying more 
specific factors at each level. The factors that we identified did not exist in isolation, echoing the 
necessity of usi ng a holistic model that goes beyond the conventional behavioral change approach 
by looking simply at the individual -level risk factors for understanding MSM’s needs so as to 
provide relevant technological support. So to speak, to better support preventive  PrEP practices 
that are more voluntary than compulsory for MSM, who are not yet infected by HIV but prone to 
high HIV risks [56], our results extend the previous study by showing that the four dimensions 
(enablers, inhibitors, risks and ch allenges, and support) should be considered at the three levelsUnderstanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:17 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. (individual, interpersonal and contextual) of the social ecological. We discussed the theoretical 
and design implications in the following sections (see Table 2).  
 
Table 2. Main findings and the associated design implications across the individual, interpersonal, and 
sociocultural level s 
Levels of the 
Social 
Ecological 
Model  Main Findings  Design Implications  
Individual  • Psychological support  
- Enabler: Perceived susceptibility  
- Inhibitor: PrEP skepticism  • Providing relevant, accessible, 
readable information and enhancing 
literacy for setting up attitudes and 
motivation.  
• Behavioral support  
- Risks and challenge: medication 
style change and unexpected sex 
opportunities  • Supporting smoother management 
among the medication time, sex 
practices, and recording behavior.  
Interpersonal  • Relational support  
- Enabler: Relational dynamics with 
partner(s).  
- Risks and challenge: Coordination 
with partner(s)  • Using in -app chat functions for users 
to coordinate and communicate with 
partner(s) for emotional support or 
date coordination.  
• Stigma avoidance  
- Inhibitor: Online and offline self -
disclosure of PrEP use.  • Paying attention to language or user 
interface design that results in 
stigmas or unwanted attention.  
• Adding ambiguous designs in online 
communities for flexible self -
disclosure and supporting vario us 
types of self - disclosure among 
populations on PrEP.  
• Support: Information support by 
healthcare professionals.  • Integrating chatbot to provide 
customized and scalable professional 
support or including an open space 
like a forum for users to access 
relevant information.  
• Paying attention to privacy issues 
when introducing technologies.  
Sociocultural  • Community support  
- Communities for norms and 
cultures where PrEP  use can 
receive more awareness and 
understanding.  • Supporting online communities 
where people feel comfor table 
exchanging information, providing 
psychological and emotional support, 
and cultivating sociocultural change 
at a broader level.310:18   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023.  
 
5.1 Psychologi cal and Behavioral Support at the Individual Level  
Our data at the individual level reveals both psychological and behavioral dimensions our 
participants encountered when taking PrEP. To be more specific, the enablers and inhibitors 
reflect our participant s’ psychological motivations  of medication use. In terms of enablers, our data 
suggest that a high percevied susceptibility and seriousness of HIV prompted our participants to 
follow the PrEP practices. However, our participants’ notions of PrEP were mixed ; some 
considered it airtight. Once taken, it can allow them to have carefree, condomless sex. Others 
were clearer about the extent to which PrEP could protect them and tended to have both condoms 
and the medication for dual protection. While both worked a s effective individual -level enablers 
for our participants to maintain their PrEP medication routine, the mixed and sometimes 
erroneous perceptions about the medication were primarily associated with our participants’ high 
perceived self -risks. And our par ticipants did not necessarily have the correct knowledge about 
PrEP for medication adherence.  
Previous research leveraged theoretical models (e.g., the IMB or Social Cognitive Model) that 
included individual factors like cognition, motivation, knowledge, perceived susceptibility, or 
self-efficacy as contributing factors to HIV medication adherence [1, 6, 52, 74] ; ours indicates that 
not all these factors equally matter in PrEP adherence. Also, it is necessary to distinguish 
treatment -driven and prevention -driven practices when introducing individual -level enablers 
into the theoretical model for medication adherence. For prevention -driven prac tices, attitudinal 
factors like severity of the situation or risks associated with individual life styles may be more 
important. On the other hand, our data showed that some of our participants’ knowledge about 
PrEP may require updates or corrections to av oid incurring further risks. Factors like cognition 
or motivation did not pertain to our study because we recruited people who voluntarily attended 
the subsidized PrEP program. Future studies could consider investigating other individual -level 
enablers for  prevention -driven practices.  
In terms of the individual -level inhibitors, our participants pointed to concern and incredulity 
over PrEP’s effectiveness, which may cause them to stop using it. Note that the participants did 
not specify the sources of their  concern or incredulity in the interview. As a preventive 
medication, PrEP has substantial benefit to reduce the risk of HIV i nfection for individuals that 
are free of but may be at high risk of acquiring HIV. The effectiveness of PrEP, however, may not 
be observable by any individual that is taking PrEP, but it requires a good understanding of 
scientific evidence well -communicated from healthcare professionals or a sufficient level of 
health literacy to comprehend science reports. Without any observable ch anges from taking PrEP, 
our participants may therefore develop concern or incredulity. Although PrEP skepticism or 
hesitancy on its effectiveness is less documented in the literature, we draw on research in vaccine 
hesitancy and surmise that some shared in dividual -level causes may account for incredulity as an 
inhibitor, including a lack of information, past experiences such as fear of pain caused by the 
medication services, or a lack of trust [24]. It is worthy of including an individual -level inhibitor, 
such as skepticism, in the model that uses behavioral -change theories to further study if it o ffsets 
enablers for prevention practices.  
We conceive the individual -level enablers and inhibitors as the two sides of a coin: the need 
for literacy. While the preventive medication provides additional protection against HIVUnderstanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:19 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. infection, it is not an elixir to cure. Correct knowledge about the medicine and the capability to 
act on it in different contexts can better support MSM’s sexual health and avoid unnecessary risks. 
With sufficient information, users can be informed to address their skepticism about PrE P 
effectiveness. Our findings echo the IMB model at the individual level [52] that people's 
knowledge about significant events that affect their lives is a core foundation of individual 
motivations and intentions to p ersist. Sufficient information and literacy about how the 
preventive medication works and how they can take PrEP based on their sex practices for 
informed and ideal protection may enhance the enablers and tone down the concerns caused by 
the inhibitors.  
On the other hand, the individual -level risks and challenges came from switching between 
medication styles and the corresponding confusion regarding medication time. Therefore, 
reminder support that closely connected the participants’ actions to their record ing may be 
desirable. Currently, our participants reported that the actions of taking pills, planning for/having 
sex, and recording medication time were disconnected across times, spaces, and technologies. In 
addition, our participants pointed out that dat a granularity and behavior recall were also posed 
as challenges. What to record and at what level of detail depends on how closely the recording is 
coupled with the behavior. This can affect how precise our participants’ medication times and 
medicine conce ntration levels are.  
Also, the individual -level risks and challenges point to a lack of skills our participants faced 
when engaging in relevant behaviors for PrEP taking. As IMB and other behavioral -change 
models like the Theory of Planned Behaviors indica te that objective and subjective behavioral 
skills are necessary for users to perform the practices [2, 52, 62] , there is potential for designs to 
provide relevant technological s upport to promote and sustain adoption by augmenting skills in 
switching between medication styles and pill -taking time.  
Taking the psychological and behavioral dimensions together, we propose that the 
intervention designs at the individual level should fi rst address users’ literacy and information 
about PrEP use. Preparing users with informed PrEP use can potentially pave the way for 
sustainable behavioral adoption and reduce skepticism. For example, applications can incorporate 
multi -modal content about S TIs and PrEP facts [51]. In addition to accessible information, the 
medication information searching process should be user -centered for credible, readable, and 
topically relevant information [87] to close the gaps of risks induced by biases and myths.  
Then, the design should scaffold users’ behavioral skills, specifically regarding medication 
times based on their sex practices. Based on our results, a closer connection and a smoother 
management among the medication time, sex practices, and recording beh avior should be 
established. A possible solution is using push notifications to remind users of taking pills based 
on their preferred schedule, such as before, during, or after mealtime. Alternatively, implementing 
sensing and ambient technology to detect relevant and appropriate times or locations for most 
prompt reminders can reflect users’ medication habits and reduce the incidents reported by our 
participants where they did not wish to discuss PrEP publicly with others. Based on a systematic 
functionali ty review, researchers pointed out that medication reminder systems should not just 
provide passive alerts but serve as a smart assistant to cultivate habits [69]. Therefore, the 
notification system may also consider helping create a new routine when the participants switch 
their medication styles. During the medication style transitions, backup notifications may be set 
up for potential scheduling disruptions [69]. 
Last, a visualization of the medication completion check can allow users to be aware of their 
practices  [64]. In additi on to the medication style change, our participants also reported having310:20   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. trouble sticking to the suggested medication routine for serendipitous dates. Mediated self -
management for medication should not just be designed for condition -related strategies but take 
a broader perspective that accommodates users’ everyday lives and particularities [22]. We 
propose that the design can integrate data from dating applications or scheduling applications 
users may use so that the system can suggest possible times for medication based on users’ dating 
arrangements. Or the system can help predict medication time based on the ecological momentary 
assessment (EMA)  or reflection data recorded by users, such as dates and times of sex events, 
dating plans, or medication records [22, 64, 72]  (see Figure 2).  
 
 
Figure 2. A proposed  concept design  interfa ce for behavioral suggestions and predictions about proper 
medication times based on users’ provided data: (a) The users can document their PrEP pill taking practices, 
(b) the system provides (un -)protected days and suggested PrEP taking days with the numb er of suggested 
PrEP pills, and (c) The system also allows the users to manage their dates for PrEP tracking.  
 
5.2 Relational Support, Informational Support, and Stigma Avoidance at the 
Interpersonal Level  
Our results demonstrated that PrEP adoption and adherence go beyond individual efforts. And 
the interpersonal -level influence can both shape and disrupt individuals’ PrEP practices. Prior 
research often discussed interpersonal -level influence from the pers pectives of doctor -patientUnderstanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:21 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. relationships [42] or supports from the general social networks like family, friends, or healthcare 
providers [5]. In our study, the strongest interpersonal enabler came from our participants’ 
partner, especially when their partner lived  with HIV or had other chronic diseases. Our 
participants mentioned that due to their serodiscordant status, they had to be very careful and 
stay medicated so as to protect their partner. The emotional connection to and responsibility for 
a committed relat ionship reinforced PrEP as a preventive medication adoption and retention.  
Our single participants (or those who were not in a committed relationship) did not specifically 
mention interpersonal -level enabler from their partner. Still, we posit that relati onal dynamics 
play an important role in PrEP practices, with other relational dimensions to be further fleshed 
out, including the comparisons and contrasts between participants who are single and those in a 
relationship regarding serodiscordant or seroconc ordant relationships as well as committed or 
open relationships.  
On the other hand, a more generally reported inhibitor across participants was the online and 
offline self -disclosure and impression management of taking PrEP. Due to misconceptions around 
PrEP, taking it was reported to be associated with stigmas like promiscuity, having HIV, and PrEP 
abuse as an excuse for engaging in unsafe sex, or a signal of being open to unsafe sex as 
documented in our study and a meta -analysis [26]. Such imposed or enacted stigm atizing 
perceptions caused our participants to refrain from disclosing their use of PrEP, both online and 
offline, either to people in the community or others who have less knowledge about HIV, MSM, 
or PrEP. This resulted in a ripple effect at the sociocul tural level because it limited PrEP awareness 
and knowledge sharing by experienced PrEP takers with the MSM community or even society as 
a whole. According to the social influence network theory, interpersonal influences, be they good 
or bad, can affect pe ople’s attitudes, opinions, and behaviors, further causing systematic group 
and social influence [28]. In other words, the interpersonal -level inhibitor we found can reinforce 
or even perpetuate the sociocultural -level inhibitor at a greater scale, which points to the 
importance of enhancing correct knowledge ab out the medication at the individual level and 
knowledge sharing at the interpersonal level so that the influence can be spread within and across 
the MSM community for the sociocultural -level effects.  
An opportunity that our participants mentioned for enha ncing correct knowledge comes from 
the healthcare professionals, both doctors and case managers, who were the sources of 
interpersonal support in information, emotion, and executive assistance. While healthcare 
professionals are the most trustworthy source s of PrEP -related information, it is not feasible and 
scalable to rely solely on their assistance as they have their main job duties [89]. Also, those MSM 
who do not enroll in the PrEP program may not be able to leverage this resource. And it can be a 
burden to offer one -on-one consultations to patients when the population on medication grows. 
Plus, patients’ questions may be recurring and overlap.  
To avoid the above -mentioned downsides of relying solely on healthcare professionals, we 
propose that potential technology designs should first leverage the wisdom and experience of the 
community by incorporating a forum or wiki that pools professional and verified informatio n 
from healthcare professionals as well as experienced PrEP users. With the technological 
affordances of recordability and retrievability [20], the information can be reviewed, edited, a nd 
updated by the community as a whole, which is a more sustainable and scalable way of 
collaborative information management [21]. 
Alternatively, mHealth technology may  implement an AI -based chatbot [72, 76, 78]  to provide 
basic recom mendations and mediate communication between patients and case managers to 
reduce their workload (see Figure 3).310:22   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023.  
 
Figure 3. The m -Health technology may integrate an AI-based chatbot or include healthcare providers for 
basic recommendations and medical information.  
 
Figure 4. The mHealth technology may incorporate a built -in messenger for coordination and 
communication with the users’ partner(s).Understanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:23 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. On the one hand, it may reduce a problem identified by [65] where a cookie -cutter approach 
was implemented in most existing HIV technology interventions, irrespective of the complexity 
of the user’s needs. On the other hand, it may also lower the entry threshold for new users, as 
they can resort to the forum or the chatbot for self -orientation and  detailed information about the 
medication and propose new questions.  
For the interpersonal challenges, our participants reported that sex practices with either a 
regular partner or serendipitous hook -ups met online were hard to pre -arrange, disrupting the  
medication time or routine, let alone recording them. Our results suggest that the mHealth 
technology should expand the social functions beyond individual use. For example, the 
application should allow users to connect with others via a built -in messenger  for coordination 
and communication with their partner(s), alleviating communication and management costs. A 
shared calendar or reminder system with a partner(s) can allow users to sync their schedules for 
better event planning and medicine taking as infor mation is distributed across users (see Figure 
4). Shared responsibility towards a mutual goal of maintaining sexual well -being between 
partners may encourage preventive medication adherence.  
Also, to encourage preventive medication adherence, technology should design an integrated 
experience that acknowledges users’ social contexts at any given time [22, 46] . In the  case of MSM 
on PrEP, our data showed that stigma was particularly involved in self -disclosure about PrEP 
taking. To avoid accidental offline disclosure by users’ technology use, mHealth applications 
should pay attention to avoid stigmatizing language and graphical designs that incur unwanted 
attention by users’ surrounding networks [48, 49, 66] . In terms of online disclosure, technol ogical 
affordances like group -specific visual signifiers [46], ambiguous and simple disclosure [57, 84] , as 
well as ephemeral data storage via automated or manual adjustment [46], allow controlled and 
selective disclosure on various social me dia or dating applications. In addition, designs need to 
avoid sending inappropriate yet persistent signals or cues when users choose not to disclose. The  
platforms should also 1) scaffold users with what to disclose and some potential consequences 
like u nsupportive responses and social rejection [46]; 2) promote awareness campaigns to educate 
users of different strategies to disclose sensitive information [57]; or 3) help cultivate norms about 
(non -)disclosure on the platforms such as preventing from making inaccurate inferences about 
others’ (non -)disclosure via ad ditional status information [83]. 
Another caveat that emerged from our data suggests that technological designs should address 
the privacy concerns users may have. Our participants revealed that they felt secure disclosing 
private information to healthcare professionals but were reserved w hen sharing their own data 
via technology. The findings suggest it may be important to make privacy protection salient and 
even visible to users for developing trust in technological designs. Prior CSCW research about 
HIV practices also pointed out that sy stem infrastructures should integrate flexible confidentiality 
and privacy designs to accommodate users with various HIV conditions [55]. Similarly, with users 
exposed to HIV risks and having the needs of taking preventive medication, we suggest that 
designs shou ld implement different levels of privacy settings and allow users to have full 
command of their data. The interface design should clarify how the data is recorded (e.g., locally 
in the application or stored in the cloud) so that the users can understand wh o can access their 
personal information.310:24   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. 5.3 Community Support at the Sociocultural Level  
We consider the sociocultural -level enablers, inhibitors, challenges, and supports as intertwined 
aspects. Our participants pointed out socially constructed sexual id entity and its associated 
stigma, amplified through literary works, the mass media, and the society as a whole, as enablers 
and inhibitors of PrEP use. The underlying fear of HIV infection has motivated our participants 
to stay protected with the medicatio n. But practices around the medication may be ridden with 
stigma and negative stereotypes that dissuade the participants from actively engaging. Previous 
works have pointed out the benefits of establishing bonds with people who share similar 
experiences an d conditions for coping strategies against stigma, accessing information, or 
acquiring social resources [46]. Our study indicates that the support networks need to constitute 
multiple levels that extend beyond people with sim ilar experiences or direct social networks like 
family and friends. It takes the whole society at multiple levels to promote and sustain target 
populations’ PrEP adoption [35, 89] . After all, individuals’ psychological and social practices are 
culturally, institutionally, and historically contextualized [43]. Therefore, it is important to not 
only ensure MSM have the proper medication information and correct knowledge about its 
effectiveness but also to h elp them construct social environments where PrEP taking is 
normalized, acknowledged, and supported.  
In terms of the challenge, many participants also mentioned that access to and public 
understanding about the medication are currently limited. This is an other evidence showing that 
enhancing literacy through education and sufficient media exposure may be required for both the 
MSM community and the general society. Some of our participants were positive and active about 
the medication through participating in the government program and expressed that they were 
willing to join forces to foster awareness and promotion.  
In light of our findings, relevant technological designs on the sociocultural level should support 
community building features for a participat ory culture that allows members to share information 
and valuable personal experiences so as to acclimate those new users, people who are at the 
contemplation stage of PrEP adoption, or other populations with high HIV risks and even the 
general public in t he society. For example, a meta analysis pointed out that many mHealth 
technologies revolving around HIV or PrEP support featured younger adults, but populations like 
older adults, women, people with various sexual identifications, and people who live with  HIV as 
well as depression or substance disorders should be included [86]. In an online community, 
features like an interactive online board and database can allow members of various 
characteristics to review, query, and connect to community resources. The publicness of such a 
community enhances the visibility of resources and information embedded in the community for 
information sharing and education. On the other hand, it may raise users’ concerns over privacy, 
as our findings suggest. User anonymity or alternate accounts may be considered as an option for 
membership signu p. 
Researchers have proposed that digital technologies should alleviate stigma in different 
contexts [70] and aim fo r culture changes at a broader level [83, 84] . For example, creating 
relevant community pledges (e.g., “living stigma -free”) to alleviate stigmas and encourage people 
in the community to alternate their biased perceptions. Ultimately, the influence may pertai n to 
the general public for a more normalized understanding about PrEP practices. Last, to motivate 
sociocultural changes for better awareness and adoption of the preventive medication, designs 
should help users bridge online and offline communities throug h built -in communication 
channels and small -interest -group formation.Understanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:25 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. 5.4 Limitations  
There are several limitations to our study. First, our sample was recruited in Taiwan; therefore, 
we do not claim transferability of our results to other cultural setting s. Different countries may 
vary in their policies or practices revolving around the PrEP program. Second, our recruitment 
was limited to people enrolled in the government program but not other MSM who acquired PrEP 
from other channels, such as generic drug s. Additionally, our interview probed users’ experiences 
and practices with the medication but not its long -term effects. Some of our participants, when 
interviewed, had just taken PrEP for weeks or months, and their use may change over time. Future 
studie s can continue exploring MSM’s use of PrEP by including more relevant variables in a 
survey to identify correlational relationships among the variables or tracking medication 
retention with a longitudinal study. During our interview, we did not request our  participants to 
give us identifiable personal information, such as their occupation or education. To establish any 
correlational relationships between the factors that we identified from our qualitative data 
anlayais with participants’ demographic variabl es, a survey study may be conducted.  
6 CONCLUSION  
Our study complements the human -centered design literature for sexual health by deepening our 
understanding about HIV preventive medication practices among MSM. Drawing on the 
theoretical framework of socia l ecological model, we go beyond the scope of understanding the 
issue at the individual level but include the interpersonal and socio -cultural levels for the enablers, 
inhibitors, risks and challenges, and supports for correspondent technological designs.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
The authors thank participants for their contribution to this study . This work was supported by the 
National  Science and Technology  Council , Taiwan (grant number  109-2223-E-007-001-MY3, 112 -
2918-I-007-003, 109-2221-E-003-010-MY3, 110 -2634-F-002-051, 112 -2636-B-006-007 and 112-2314-B-
006-081-MY3. 
REFERENCES  
[1] Adegoke O Adefolalu. 2018. Cognitive -behavioural theories and adherence: application and relevance in antiretroviral 
therapy. Southe rn African journal of HIV medicine , 19, 1, 1 -7.  
[2] Icek Ajzen. 1991. The theory of planned behavior. Organizational behavior and human decision processes , 50, 2, 179 -211. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/ 0749-5978(91)90020 -T 
[3] Peter L Anderson, David V Glidden, Albert Liu, Susan Buchbinder, Javier R Lama, Juan Vicente Guanira, Vanessa 
McMahan, Lane R Bushman, Martín Casapía and Orlando Montoya -Herrera. 2012. Emtricitabi ne-tenofovir 
concentrations and pre -exposure prophylaxis efficacy in men who have sex with men. Science translational medicine , 
4, 151, 151ra125 -151ra125. https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.30040 06 
[4] Galit Zeluf Andersson, Maria Reinius, Lars E Eriksson, Veronica Svedhem, Farhad Mazi Esfahani, Keshab Deuba, Deepa 
Rao, Goodluck Willey Lyatuu, Danielle Giovenco and Anna Mia Ekström. 2020. Stigma reduction interve ntions in 
people living with HIV to improve health -related quality of life. The Lancet HIV , 7, 2, e129 -e140.  
[5] Ashley Archiopoli, Tamar Ginossar, Bryan Wilcox, Magdalena Avila, Ricky Hill and John Oetzel. 2016. Factors of 
interpersonal communication and  behavioral health on medication self -efficacy and medication adherence. AIDS care , 
28, 12, 1607 -1614.  
[6] Mujeeba Ashraf and Rabia Nisar Virk. 2021. Determinants of medication adherence in patients with HIV: 3 application 
of the health belief model 4. JPMA, 71, 1409.  
[7] Albert Bandura, William H Freeman and Richard Lightsey. 1999. Self -efficacy: The exercise of control. Springer.  
[8] Stefan Baral, Carmen H Logie, Ashley Grosso, Andrea L Wirtz and Chris Beyrer. 2013. Modified social ecological model: 
a tool to guide the assessment of the risks and risk contexts of HIV epidemics. BMC public health , 13, 1, 1 -8.310:26   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. [9] Katie B Biello, Jonath an Hill -Rorie, Pablo K Valente, Donna Futterman, Patrick S Sullivan, Lisa Hightow -Weidman, 
Kathryn Muessig, Julian Dormitzer, Matthew J Mimiaga and Kenneth H Mayer. 2021. Development and Evaluation of 
a Mobile App Designed to Increase HIV Testing and Pre -exposure Prophylaxis Use Among Young Men Who Have Sex 
With Men in the United States: Open Pilot Trial. Journal of Medical Internet Research , 23, 3, e25107. https://doi.org/  
10.2196/25107  
[10] Katie B Biello, Catherine E Oldenburg, Jennifer A Mitty, Elizabet h F Closson, Kenneth H Mayer, Steven A Safren and 
Matthew J Mimiaga. 2017. The “Safe Sex” conundrum: anticipated stigma from sexual partners as a barrier to PrEP use 
among substance using MSM engaging in transactional sex. AIDS and Behavior , 21, 1, 300 -306. https://doi.org/10.1007/  
s10461 -016-1466-y 
[11] Jomara Binda, Chien Wen Yuan, Natalie Cope, Hyehyun Park, Eun Kyoung Choe and John M Carroll. 2018. Supporting 
effective sharing of health information among intergenerational family members. In Proceedings of the 12th eai 
international conference on pervasive computing technologies for healthcare . 148-157 
[12] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in psychology , 3, 
2, 77-101. https://doi.org/10. 1191/1478088706qp063oa  
[13] Urie Bronfenbrenner. 1979. The ecology of human development: Experiments by nature and design. Harvard university 
press.  
[14] Lisanne Brown, Kate Macintyre and Lea Trujillo. 2003. Interventions to reduce HIV/AIDS stigma: what h ave we 
learned? AIDS education and prevention , 15, 1, 49 -69.  
[15] Adrian Bussone, Bakita Kasadha, Simone Stumpf, Abigail Durrant, Shema Tariq, Jo Gibbs, Kitty Lloyd and Jon Bird. 
2020. Trust, Identity, Privacy, and Security Considerations for Designing a Peer Data Sharing Platform Between People 
Living With HIV. Proceedings of the ACM on Human -Computer Interaction , 4. https://doi.org/10.1145/3415244  
[16] Adrian Bussone, Simone Stumpf and George Buchanan. 2016. It feels like i'm managing myself: Hiv+ people  tracking 
their personal health information. In Proceedings of the 9th nordic conference on human -computer interaction . 1-10 
[17] Centers -for-Disease -Control -and-Prevention. 2021.  Estimated HIV incidence and prevalence in the United States 2015 –
2019. Retrieved Sept. 25th, 2021, from http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/library/reports/hiv -surveillance.html .  
[18] ChingChe J Chiu and Sean D Young. 2015. The relationship between online social network use, sexual risk behaviors, 
and HIV sero -status among a sample of predominately African American and Latino men who have sex with men 
(MSM) social media users. AIDS and Behavior , 19, 2, 98 -105.  
[19] Deng -Min Chuang and Peter A. Newman. 2018. Pre -Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) Awareness and Acceptability Among 
Men Who Have Sex With Men in Taiwan. AIDS Education and Prevention , 30, 6, 490 -501. https://doi.org/10.1521/  
aeap.20 18.30.6.490  
[20] Herbert H Clark and Susan E Brennan. 1991. Grounding in communication.  
[21] Ulrike Cress and Joachim Kimmerle. 2008. A systemic and cognitive view on collaborative knowledge building with 
wikis. International Journal of Computer -Supported  Collaborative Learning , 3, 2, 105. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412 -007-
9035-z 
[22] Lea Gulstav Dalgaard, Erik Grönvall and Nervo Verdezoto. 2013. Accounting for medication particularities: Designing 
for everyday medication management. In 2013 7th Internati onal Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for 
Healthcare and Workshops . 137-144 
[23] Carole Déglise, L Suzanne Suggs and Peter Odermatt. 2012. SMS for disease control in developing countries: a 
systematic review of mobile health applications. Journal of telemedicine and telecare , 18, 5, 273 -281.  
[24] Eve Dubé, Caroline Laberge, Maryse Guay, Paul Bramadat, Réal Roy and Julie A Bettinger. 2013. Vaccine hesitancy: an 
overview. Human vaccines & immunotherapeutics , 9, 8, 1763 -1773.  
[25] Gladys Dzansi , Jeniffer Chipps and Margaret Lartey. 2022. Use of mobile phone among patients with HIV/AIDS in a 
low-middle income setting: a descriptive exploratory study. Behaviour & Information Technology , 41, 4, 796 -804. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2020.1836257  
[26] Alberto Edeza, E Karina Santamaria, Pablo Kokay Valente, Ashley Gomez, Adedotun Ogunbajo and Katie Biello. 2021. 
Experienced barriers to adherence to pre -exposure prophylaxis for HIV prevention among MSM: a systematic review 
and meta -ethnography of q ualitative studies. AIDS care , 33, 6, 697 -705.  
[27] Julie Franks, Yael Hirsch -Moverman, Avelino S Loquere, K Rivet Amico, Robert M Grant, Bonnie J Dye, Yan Rivera, 
Robert Gamboa and Sharon B Mannheimer. 2018. Sex, PrEP, and stigma: experiences with HIV pr e-exposure 
prophylaxis among New York City MSM participating in the HPTN 067/ADAPT Study. AIDS and Behavior , 22, 4, 1139 -
1149. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10461 -017-1964-6 
[28] Noah E. Friedkin. 2003. Social influence network theory: Toward a science of strategic modification of interpersonal 
influence systems. In N. R. Council, Ed. The National Academies Press https://doi .org/doi:10.17226/10735  
[29] Shelley D Golden, Kenneth R McLeroy, Lawrence W Green, Jo Anne L Earp and Lisa D Lieberman Upending the social 
ecological model to guide health promotion efforts toward policy and environment al change . Sage Publications Sage CA: 
Los Angeles, CA, City, 2015.Understanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:27 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. [30] Sarit A Golub, Kristi E Gamarel, H Jonathon Rendina, Anthony Surace and Corina L Lelutiu -Weinberger. 2013. From 
efficacy to effectiveness: facilitators and barriers to PrEP acceptabili ty and motivations for adherence among MSM and 
transgender women in New York City. AIDS Patient Care and STDs , 27, 4, 248 -254. https://doi.org/10.1089/  
apc.2012.0419  
[31] Sajanee Halko and Julie A Kientz. 2010. Personality and persuasive technology: an exploratory study on health -
promoting mobile applications. In International conference on persuasive technology . 150-161 
[32] Gregory M Herek and John P Capitanio. 1999. AIDS  stigma and sexual prejudice. American behavioral scientist , 42, 7, 
1130-1147.  
[33] Lisa B Hightow -Weidman, Kathryn Muessig, Eli Rosenberg, Travis Sanchez, Sara LeGrand, Laura Gravens and Patrick 
S Sullivan. 2018. University of North Carolina/Emory Center  for Innovative Technology (iTech) for addressing the HIV 
epidemic among adolescents and young adults in the United States: protocol and rationale for center development. 
JMIR research protocols , 7, 8, e10365.  
[34] Robert S Hogg, Katherine Heath, David Ba ngsberg, Benita Yip, Natasha Press, Michael V O'Shaughnessy and Julio SG 
Montaner. 2002. Intermittent use of triple -combination therapy is predictive of mortality at baseline and after 1 year 
of follow -up. Aids, 16, 7, 1051 -1058.  
[35] Poyao Huang, Huei -Jiuan Wu, Carol Strong, Feng -Ming Jan, Ling -Wen Mao, Nai -Ying Ko, Chia -Wen Li, Chien -Yu 
Cheng and Stephane Wen -Wei Ku. 2019. Unspeakable PrEP: a qualitative study of sexual communication, problematic 
integration, and uncertainty management among men who have  sex with men in Taiwan. Journal of Applied 
Communication Research , 47, 6, 611 -627. https://doi.org/10.1080/10410236.2020.1787927  
[36] Gregory D Kirk, Seth S Himelhoch, Ryan P Westergaard and Curt G Beckwith Using mobile health technology to improve 
HIV ca re for persons living with HIV and substance abuse . Hindawi, City, 2013.  
[37] Hernando Knobel, Jordi Alonso, José L Casado, Julio Collazos, Juan González, Isabel Ruiz, José M Kindelan, Alexia 
Carmona, Javier Juega and Antonio Ocampo. 2002. Validation of a simplified medication adherence questionnaire in a 
large cohort of HIV -infecte d patients: the GEEMA Study. Aids, 16, 4, 605 -613.  
[38] Nai-Ying Ko, Huei -Jiuan Wu, Carol Strong, Chia -Wen Li, Wen -Wei Ku and Su -Ting Hsu. 2018. Differences in 
awareness of and willingness to use pre -exposure prophylaxis and anticipated condom use among s erodiscordant 
couples in Taiwan. AIDS Care , 30, 10, 1306 -1310. https://doi.org/10.1080/09540121.2018.1481195  
[39] Florence M Koechlin, Virginia A Fonner, Sarah L  Dalglish, Kevin R O’Reilly, Rachel Baggaley, Robert M Grant, Michelle 
Rodolph, Ioannis Hodges -Mameletzis and Caitlin E Kennedy. 2017. Values and preferences on the use of oral pre -
exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV prevention among multiple populations: a systematic review of the literature. 
AIDS and Behavior , 21, 5, 1325 -1335. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10461 -016-1627-z 
[40] Pinky P Kumar and Mahmood A Rashid. 2018.  Crowdsourcing based social awareness for taboo diseases like HIV/AIDS. 
In Proceedings of the Australasian Computer Science Week Multiconference . 1-9 
[41] Morgan LaBelle, Carol Strong and Yuan -Chi Tseng. 2020. mHealth Strategies to Promote Uptake and Adher ence to 
PrEP: A Systematic Review. In Cross -Cultural Design. Applications in Health, Learning, Communication, and Creativity . 
Cham. 99 -113 
[42] Nienke Langebeek, Elizabeth H Gisolf, Peter Reiss, Sigrid C Vervoort, Thóra B Hafsteinsdóttir, Clemens Richter, Mirjam 
AG Sprangers and Pythia T Nieuwkerk. 2014. Predictors and correlates of adherence to combination antiretroviral 
therapy (ART) for chronic  HIV infection: a meta -analysis. BMC medicine , 12, 1, 1 -14.  
[43] Jean Lave. 2011. Apprenticeship in Critical Ethnographic Practice. University of Chicago Press.  
[44] Richard T Lester, Paul Ritvo, Edward J Mills, Antony Kariri, Sarah Karanja, Michael H Ch ung, William Jack, James 
Habyarimana, Mohsen Sadatsafavi and Mehdi Najafzadeh. 2010. Effects of a mobile phone short message service on 
antiretroviral treatment adherence in Kenya (WelTel Kenya1): a randomised trial. The Lancet , 376, 9755, 1838 -1845.  
[45] Albert Liu, Kenneth Coleman, Kelly Bojan, Pedro Alonso Serrano, Temitope Oyedele, Amayvis Garcia, Elizabeth 
Enriquez -Bruce, Patricia Emmanuel, Jeb Jones and Patrick Sullivan. 2019. Developing a mobile app (LYNX) to support 
linkage to HIV/sexually transmit ted infection testing and pre -exposure prophylaxis for young men who have sex with 
men: protocol for a randomized controlled trial. JMIR research protocols , 8, 1, e10659.  
[46] Juan F Maestre, Patrycja Zdziarska, Aehong Min, Anna N Baglione, Chia -Fang Chun g and Patrick C Shih. 2021. Not 
another medication adherence app: Critical reflections on addressing public HIV -related stigma through design. 
Proceedings of the ACM on Human -Computer Interaction , 4, CSCW3, 1 -28.  
[47] Kevin M Maloney, Anna Bratcher, Ryan Wilkerson and Patrick S Sullivan. 2020. Electronic and other new media 
technology interventions for HIV care and prevention: a systematic review. Journal of the International AIDS Society , 
23, 1, e25439.  
[48] Gabriela Marcu, Nadia Dowshen, Shuvadittya Sah a, Ressa Reneth Sarreal and Nazanin Andalibi. 2016. TreatYoSelf: 
empathy -driven behavioral intervention for marginalized youth living with HIV. PervasiveHealth , 16, 69 -76.  
[49] Michael Massimi, Jill P Dimond and Christopher A Le Dantec. 2012. Finding a ne w normal: the role of technology in 
life disruptions. In Proceedings of the acm 2012 conference on computer supported cooperative work . 719-728310:28   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. [50] Kenneth R McLeroy, Daniel Bibeau, Allan Steckler and Karen Glanz. 1988. An ecological perspective on health  
promotion programs. Health Education Quarterly , 15, 4, 351 -377. https://doi.org/10.1177/109019818801500401  
[51] John T Mitchell, Sara LeGrand, Lisa B Hightow -Weidm an, Mehri S McKellar, Angela DM Kashuba, Mackenzie Cottrell, 
Tony McLaurin, Goutam Satapathy and F Joseph McClernon. 2018. Smartphone -based contingency management 
intervention to improve pre -exposure prophylaxis adherence: Pilot trial. JMIR mHealth and uHe alth, 6, 9, e10456. 
https://doi.org/10.2196/10456  
[52] R Moss and G Donenberg. 2003. The Information -Motivation -Behavioral Skills Model (IMB) of HIV -risk: its application 
to yo uth in psychiatric care. In Poster accepted for presentation at the Biennial Meeting of the Society for Research on Child 
Development, Tampa, FL, April  
[53] Michael E. Newcomb, Melissa C. Mongrella, Benjamin Weis, Samuel J. McMillen and Brian Mustanski. 20 16. Partner 
disclosure of PrEP use and undetectable viral load on geosocial networking apps: Frequency of disclosure and decisions 
about condomless sex. JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes , 71, 2, 200 -206. https://doi.org/  
10.1097/QAI.000 0000000000819  
[54] Laura Nyblade, Anne Stangl, Ellen Weiss and Kim Ashburn. 2009. Combating HIV stigma in health care settings: what 
works? Journal of the international AIDS Society , 12, 1, 1 -7.  
[55] Chrysanthi Papoutsi and Ian Brown. 2015. Privacy as articulation work in HIV health services. In Proceedings of the 
18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . 339-348 
[56] Peng Peng, Shu Su, Christopher K Fairley, Minjie  Chu, Shengyang Jiang, Xun Zhuang and Lei Zhang. 2018. A global 
estimate of the acceptability of pre -exposure prophylaxis for HIV among men who have sex with men: a systematic 
review and meta -analysis. AIDS and Behavior , 22, 4, 1063 -1074. https://doi.org/1 0.1007/s10461 -017-1675-z 
[57] Annika Pinch, Jeremy Birnholtz, Ashley Kraus, Kathryn Macapagal and David A. Moskowitz. 2021. “It's not exactly 
prominent or direct, but it's there”: Understanding Strategies for Sensitive Disclosure Online. In Companion Publi cation 
of the 2021 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . 149-152 
[58] Steven D Pinkerton and Carol L Galletly. 2007. Reducing HIV transmission risk by increasing serostatus disclosure: a 
mathematical modeling analysis. AIDS and Behavior , 11, 5, 698 -705.  
[59] Rogério M Pinto, Ashley Lacombe -Duncan, Emma Sophia Kay and Kathryn R Berringer. 2019. Expanding knowledge 
about implementation of pre -exposure prophylaxis (PrEP): A methodological review. AIDS and Behavior , 23, 10, 27 61-
2778. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10461 -019-02577 -7 
[60] Chris Power. 1991. Social and economic background and class inequalities in health among young adults. Social science 
& medicine , 32, 4, 411 -417.  
[61] H Jonathon Rendina and Brian Mustanski. 2018. Privacy, trust, and data sharing in web -based and mobile research: 
participant perspectives in a large nationwide sample of men who have sex with men in the United S tates. Journal of 
medical Internet research , 20, 7, e233. https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.9019  
[62] Chokechai Rongkavilit, Sylvie Naar -King, Linda M Kaljee, Apirudee Panthong,  Juline A Koken, Torsak Bunupuradah 
and Jeffrey T Parsons. 2010. Applying the information -motivation -behavioral skills model in medication adherence 
among Thai youth living with HIV: a qualitative study. AIDS patient care and STDs , 24, 12, 787 -794.  
[63] Lora L Sabin, Mary Bachman DeSilva, Christopher J Gill, Zhong Li, Taryn Vian, Xie Wubin, Cheng Feng, Xu Keyi, Lan 
Guanghua and Jessica E Haberer. 2015. Improving adherence to antiretroviral therapy with triggered real time text 
message reminders: the China through technology study (CATS). Journal of acquired immune deficiency syndromes 
(1999) , 69, 5, 551.  
[64] Gabrielle M Salib, Juan Fernando Maestre, Kenneth B Nimley, Nadia Dowshen and Gabriela Marcu. 2018. The role of 
reflection and context in medication adherence tracking for people living with hiv. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1-6 
[65] Aneesha Singh, Jo Gibbs and Ann Blandford. 2019. Emotion and Experience in Negotiating HIV -Related Digital 
Resou rces: " It's not just a runny nose!". In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems . 1-14 
[66] Aneesha Singh, Jo Gibbs, Claudia Estcourt, Pam Sonnerberg and Ann Blandford. 2017. Are HIV smartphone apps and 
online interventions fit for purpose? In Proceedings of the 2017 international conference on digital health . 6-15 
[67] Andrew Spieldenner. 2016. PrEP whores and HIV prevention: The queer communication of HIV pre -exposure 
prophylaxis (PrEP). Journal of homosexuality , 63, 12, 1685 -1697.  
[68] Anne L Stangl, Jennifer K Lloyd, Laura M Brady, Claire E Holland and Stefan Baral. 2013. A systematic review of 
interventions to reduce HIV‐related stigma and discrimination from 2002 to 2013: how far have we come? Journal of 
the International AIDS Society , 16, 18734.  
[69] Katarzyna Stawarz, Anna L Cox and Ann Blandford. 2014. Don't forget your pill! Designing effective medication 
reminder apps that support users' daily routines. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems . 2269 -2278Understanding and Designing Multi -level Preventive Medication Support  
Against HIV for Men who Have Sex with Men in Taiwan   310:29 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. [70] Angelika Strohmayer, Janis Lena Meissner, Alexander Wilson, Sarah Charlton and Laura McIntyre. 2020. "We come 
together as one...and hope for solidarity to live on": On Designing Technologies for Activism and the Commemoration 
of Lost Lives . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 87–100 
[71] Carol Strong, Huei -Jiuan Wu, Yuan -Chi Tseng, Chien -Wen Yuan, Yi -Fang Yu, Chien -En Liao, Yi -Wen Chen, Yi -Chen 
Hung, Chia -Wen Li and Po -Hsien Huang. 2020. Mobile App (UPrE PU) to Monitor Adherence to Pre -exposure 
Prophylaxis in Men Who Have Sex With Men: Protocol for a User -Centered Approach to Mobile App Design and 
Development. JMIR Research Protocols , 9, 12, e20360.  
[72] Michael Sunday Julius, Uzoma Rita Alo, Fergus Uchen na Onu and Chinyere Ihuoma Akobundu. 2021. Machine 
Learning Framework to Predict Patient Non -Adherence to Medication using Non -Clinical Data: A Prognosis Approach. 
In The 2021 9th International Conference on Computer and Communications Management . 98-103 
[73] Shannon M Sweeney and Peter A Vanable. 2016. The association of HIV -related stigma to HIV medication adherence: 
a systematic review and synthesis of the literature. AIDS and Behavior , 20, 1, 29 -50.  
[74] Amanda E Tanner, Lilli Mann, Eunyoung Song, Jorg e Alonzo, Katherine Schafer, Elías Arellano, Jesus M Garcia and 
Scott D Rhodes. 2016. weCARE: a social media -based intervention designed to increase HIV care linkage, retention, 
and health outcomes for racially and ethnically diverse young MSM. AIDS educat ion and prevention: official publication 
of the International Society for AIDS Education , 28, 3, 216.  
[75] Robert Thomson, Masaki Yuki and Naoya Ito. 2015. A socio -ecological approach to national differences in online 
privacy concern. Comput. Hum. Behav. , 51, PA, 285 –292. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.04.068  
[76] Yuan -Chi Tseng, Weerachaya Jarupreechachan and Tuan -He Lee. 2023. Understanding the benefits and de sign of 
chatbots for migrant workers in healthcare encounters: a scenario -based interview. Proceedings of the ACM on Human -
Computer Interaction , 7, CSCW2, Article 315, 34.  
[77] UNAIDS. UNAIDS Data 2020 . United Nations, 2020.  
[78] Stefano Valtolina, Barba ra Rita Barricelli and Serena Di Gaetano. 2020. Communicability of traditional interfaces VS 
chatbots in healthcare and smart home domains. Behaviour & Information Technology , 39, 1, 108 -132. https://doi.org/  
10.1080/0144929X.2019.1637025  
[79] Ward PH van Bilsen, Hanne ML Zimmermann, Anders Boyd, Udi Davidovich and HIV Transmission Elimination 
Amsterdam Initiative. 2020. Burden of living with HIV among men who have sex with men: a mixed -methods study. 
The Lancet HIV , 7, 12, e835 -e843. https://doi.org/10.101 6/S2352 -3018(20)30197 -1 
[80] J Mitchell Vaterlaus, Emily V Patten, Cesia Roche and Jimmy A Young. 2015. #Gettinghealthy: The perceived influence 
of social media on young adult health behaviors. Computers in Human Behavior , 45, 151 -157. https://doi.org/10.1 016/ 
j.chb.2014.12.013  
[81] Kerryellen G Vroman, Sajay Arthanat and Catherine Lysack. 2015. “Who over 65 is online?” Older adults’ dispositions 
toward information communication technology. Computers in Human Behavior , 43, 156 -166. https://doi.org/10.1016/  
j.chb.2014.10.018  
[82] Hongy i Wang, Jing Zhang, Zhenxing Chu, Qinghai Hu, Willa Dong, Xiaojie Huang, Yaokai Chen, Hui Wang, Xiaoqing 
He and Lukun Zhang. 2020. Risk -Taking Behaviors and Adherence to HIV Pre -Exposure Prophylaxis in Users of 
Geosocial Networking Apps: Real -Word, Multice nter Study. Journal of Medical Internet Research , 22, 10, e22388. 
https://doi.org/10.2196/22388  
[83] Mark Warner, Andreas Gutmann, M Angela Sasse and Ann Blandford. 2018. Privacy unraveling around explicit HIV 
status disclosure fields in the online geosoci al hookup app Grindr. Proceedings of the ACM on human -computer 
interaction , 2, CSCW, 1 -22.  
[84] Mark Warner, Juan F Maestre, Jo Gibbs, Chia -Fang Chung and Ann Blandford. 2019. Signal appropriation of explicit 
HIV status disclosure fields in sex -social app s used by gay and bisexual men. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1-15 
[85] Kaye Wellings, Martine Collumbien, Emma Slaymaker, Susheela Singh, Zoé Hodges, Dhaval Patel and Nathalie Bajos. 
2006. Sexual behaviou r in context: a global perspective. The Lancet , 368, 9548, 1706 -1728.  
[86] Laura B Whiteley, Elizabeth M Olsen, Kayla K Haubrick, Enyonam Odoom, Nicholas Tarantino and Larry K Brown. 
2021. A review of interventions to enhance HIV medication adherence. Current HIV/AIDS Reports , 18, 5, 443 -457.  
[87] Lauren Wilcox, Steven Feiner, Noémie Elhadad, David Vawdrey and Tran H Tran. 2014. Patient -centered tools for 
medication information search. In International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for 
Healthcare:[proceedings]. International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare. 2014 . 49 
[88] Michael Williams and Tami Moser. 2019. The art of coding and thematic exploration in qualitative research. 
International Management Review , 15, 1, 45 -55.  
[89] Kennethea Wilson, Jacob Bleasdale and Sarahmona M Przybyla. 2021. Provider -patient communication on pre -
exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV prevention: An exploration of healthcare provider challenges. Health 
Communication , 36, 13, 1677 -1686.310:30   Chien Wen (Tina) Yuan , Yuan -Chi Tseng, & Carol Strong  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 7, No. CSCW2 , Article 310, Publication date: October  2023. [90] T Charles Witzel, Will Nutland and Adam Bourne. 2019. What are the motivations and barriers to pre -exposure 
prophylaxis (PrEP) use among black men who have sex with men aged 18 –45 in London? Results from a qualitative 
study. Sexually Transmitte d Infections , 95, 4, 262 -266. https://doi.org/10.1136/sextrans -2018-053773  
[91] Huei -Jiuan Wu, Yi -Fang Yu, Stephane Wen -Wei Ku, Yuan -Chi Tseng, Chien -Wen Yuan, Chia -Wen Li, Po -Hsien 
Huang, Nai -Ying Ko, Peter L Anderson and Carol Strong. 2022. Usability and  effectiveness of adherence monitoring of 
a mobile app designed to monitor and improve adherence to event -driven and daily HIV pre -exposure prophylaxis 
among men who have sex with men in Taiwan. Digital health , 8, 20552076221102770.  
[92] Meiqi Xin, Kasiso mayajula Viswanath, Angela Yuen -Chun Li, CAO Wangnan, HU Yuhong, Joseph Tak -Fai Lau and 
Phoenix Kit -Han Mo. 2020. The effectiveness of electronic health interventions for promoting HIV -Preventive 
behaviors among men who have sex with men: meta -analysis bas ed on an integrative framework of design and 
implementation features. Journal of Medical Internet Research , 22, 5, e15977. https://doi.org/10.2196/15977  
[93] Chuang -Wen You, Chien Wen Yuan, Nanyi Bi, Min -Wei Hung, Po -Chun Huang and Hao -Chuan Wang. 2021. Go Gig 
or Go Home: Enabling Social Sensing to Share Personal Data with Intimate Partner for the Health and Wellbeing of 
Long -Hour workers. In Proceedings of the  2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1-16 
 
 
Received January 2023 ; revised April 2023 ; accepted July 2023 .