CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
Paper 273
Page 1Let’s Talk about Sex t: How Adolescent s Seek Support and 
Advice about Their Online Sexual Experiences 
Afsaneh Razi  Karla Badillo-Urquiola  Pamela J. Wisniewski  
Department of Computer Science  Department of Computer Science  Department of Computer Science  
University of Central Florida  University of Central Florida  University of Central Florida  
Orlando, FL, USA  Orlando, FL, USA  Orlando, FL, USA  
Afsaneh.razi@knights.ucf.edu  kcurquiola10@knights.ucf.edu  pamwis@ucf.edu  
ABSTRACT  
We conducted  a thematic content analysis  of  4,180  posts  by  
adolescents  (ages 12-17)  on  an  online  peer  support mental  
health  forum  to  understand  what and  how adolescents talk  
about  their  online sexual interactions.  Youth  used  the  
platform  to  seek  support  (83%),  connect with  others  (15%), 
and  give advice  (5%)  about sexting,  their  sexual orientation,  
sexual abuse,  and  explicit content. Females  often  received  
unwanted  nudes from  strang ers  and  struggled  with  how to  
turn  down  sexting  requests  from  people they  knew. 
Meanwhile,  others  who  sought support complained  that  
they  received  unwanted  sexual solicitations  while doing  
so—to  the point that adolescents  gave advice to  one another  
on which  users  to  stay  away  from.  Our  research  provides  
insight into  the online sexual experiences  of  adolescents  
and  how they  seek  support  around  these issues.  We discuss  
how to  design  peer-based  social media platforms  to  support  
the well-being  and  safety  of  youth.  
Author Keywords  
Adolescent Online Safety; Social Support Seeking; Online  
Sexual Experiences; Sexting; Sexual Risks;  Peer  Support.  
CSS Concepts  
•  Human-centered  computing~Social content sharing 
INTRODUCTION 
According to Pew Research [5] , 95% of teens in th e United 
States  have  access  to  a smartphone,  and  45%  say  they  are  
constantly  online .  As such,  adolescent  relationships  are 
increasingly  being  mediated  by  their  technology  use.  Over  
half  (57%)  of  teens  (ages  13-17)  have  started  a new  
friendship  online,  and  of  the  35%  of  teens  that  have  had  a 
romantic relationship,  8% met their  romantic partner  online  
[30]. Another  55% of  adolescents  have used  social media to  
flirt  with  someone  they  are  interested  in  [30].  While  the 
internet affords  adolescents numerous  opportunities  to  form  
new  relationships  and  explore  their  sexual  identities  [47], 
the flip side is that it can also pose new sexual risks. For instance,  the Crimes against Children  Research  Center  
estimates that 23% of  youth  in  the U.S. have experienced  
unwanted  exposure  to  pornography,  and  9% reported  
receiving  unwanted  sexual solicitations  online [23]. Over  
half  of  youth  in  the U.S. (ages 10  to  17)  have received  at  
least one  online sexual solicitation  (wanted  or  unwanted)  in  
the past year  [37].  Therefore,  examining  the online sexual  
experiences  of  modern- day  adolescents  is  an  important, and  
growing  area  of  research  within  the adolescent  
developmental psychology  literature [19,25,44]  and  within  
the SIGCHI  research  community  [6,7,20,34,39,53].  These 
online sexual  experiences  are a new  manifestation  of  an  
age-old  social computing  phenomenon  [14,35,41]  that 
warrants  our  sustained  attention.    
Youth  leverage the internet  to  seek  support and  advice 
about relationships  [26]  and  their  sexual health  [25,44].  
Yet,  less  is  known  about how  they  seek  advice  and  support  
via the internet  about their  online  sexual experiences  (i.e.,  
sexual interactions  that  are  mediated  by  technology).  In  
2014,  Weinstein  et al.  [51]  found  that  using  the internet as a  
means  to  seek  intimacy  with  others  has become a key  
stressor  for  adolescents.  These researchers  were among  the  
first to  analyze  digital trace data from  adolescents  to  gain  
deeper  insights  into  their  online experiences.  We build  upon  
this  prior  research  by  analyzing  social media trace data  
from  an  online  peer  support  platform  to  understand  how  
adolescents  seek  support and  advice regarding  their  online  
sexual experiences.  We pose the following  high-level  
research  question s:  
•  RQ1:  For  what purpose do  adolescents  post on  online 
peer  support platforms when  discussing  their online 
sexual experiences? 
•  RQ2:  a)  What types of sexual experiences  do 
adolescents most frequently post  about?  b)  What are 
key  characteristics  of these experiences? 
•  RQ3:  What are the consequences  of adolescents 
experiencing  these online  sexual interactions? 
•  RQ4:  What are the key challenges associated  with 
adolescents seeking  online peer  support about their 
online sexual experiences? 
To  answer  these questions,  we conducted  a thematic  
analysis  of  4,180  posts  made by  3,034  adolescents  (ages  12-
17) on  an  online peer  support platform  for  youth  and  young Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is 
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI '20, April 25 –30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA  
© 2020 Association for  Computing Machinery.  
ACM I  SBN 978-1-4503-6708- 0/20/04…$15.00   
https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376400CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
Paper 273
Page 2adults. We found  that adolescents  used  the platform  to  seek  
support, connect with  others,  and  give advice about their  
online sexual experiences.  For  the most part, females  were 
the primary  posters,  asking  for  advice on  how  to  combat  
peer  pressure when  a romantic interest or  friend  asked  for  
nudes. A significant number  of  adolescents  expressed  
concerns  about unwanted  sexual advances,  while they  were  
seeking  support online —to  the point  that some  posts  
warned  adolescents  about other  malicious  users.  Another  
major  theme  was  that adolescents  tried  to  connect with  
others  who  had  similar  life  experiences  as them. Our  study  
makes  the following  research  contributions:  
•   Analyzes  social media trace  data to  provide an  
unfiltered  view into  the lived  online sexual experiences  
of  over  3,000  adolescent s.  
•   Provides  a  deeper  understanding  of  peer  support  
seeking  behaviors  for  their  online sexual experiences.  
•   Uncovers  the challenges  of  online peer  support and  
makes  recommendations  for  design.  
Our  research  makes empirical  contributions  to  the fields  of  
Human-Computer  Interaction  (HCI),  adolescent online  
safety,  and  online peer  support. Our  findings  will also  help  
designers  create online peer  support forums  that consider  
the vulnerability  and  online safety  of  adolescent s.  
BACKGROUND  
The SIGCHI  community  has  a history  of  engaging  in  
important work  related  to  sensitive online disclosures and  
sexual abuse  [3,4,31,33].  For  instance, Andalibi et al.  [4]  
investigated  self-disclosures by  sexual abuse survivors  and  
the relationships  between  anonymity,  disclosure,  and  
support seeking.  Similarly,  our  work  studies  self-
disclosures about sexual abuse but more  broadly  examines  
other  online sexual experiences.  In  contrast,  our  research  
specifically  focuses on  adolescents,  who  are 
developmentally  different than  adults.  Below,  we situate 
our  research  at the intersection  of  technology,  sexuality,  and  
online risks  for  adolescents.  We highlight the gaps  within  
the literature to  emphasize the  contributions  of  our  research.  
Adolescents, Technology, and Sexual Exploration  
Emergent technologies, such  as social media and  mobile  
smartphones, have provided  new means  for  adolescents  to  
explore,  seek  advice,  and  talk  about sensitive topics, such  as 
their sexuality, sexual health, and sexual experiences 
[17,44,52] . For example, Suzuki and Calzo [44] studied two 
online bulletin boards to understand the types of sexuality 
and relationship questions adolescent s asked their peers . 
They found that adolescent s often posted about their 
physical, emotional, and social selves. Romantic 
relationships and sexual health were the mo st common 
topics discussed . In contrast , Forte et al. [17] surveyed high 
school students about their social media and information -
seeking behaviors. T hey found that students frequently 
asked their social networks about school -related topics, 
rather than sexual identity or health. While this work 
demonstrates that adolescent s leverage the internet to seek support and information, it also suggests that adolescent s 
use online platforms differently based on the context (e.g., 
health) and audience (e.g., classmates). Further, this 
research gives us insights into how adolescent s seek support 
for sexual health in general, rather than technology -
mediated sexual experiences. We build upon this literature 
by examining how adolescent s seek support about online 
sexual experiences via online platform for peer support. 
Adolescent Online Safety and Sexual Risks 
The bulk of research around adolescents and their online 
sexual experiences has primarily focused on sexual risks, 
including sexting (e.g., [13,24,28,37,40,48] ), unwanted 
online sexual solicitations [36], and online sexual grooming 
[18]. In 2018, Sklenarova et al. [42] conducted a survey 
with German adolescent s to understand their experiences 
with unwanted sexual solicitations. They found that 51% of 
adolescents had exp erienced online sexual interactions, 
mostly with peers. Only 10% of these experiences were 
perceived as negative or unwanted, but those who lacked 
social support received more unwanted solicitations [42]. 
While such findings are valuable, m ost of our knowledge 
about wha t adolescent s are doing online, as well as the 
outcomes associated with these activities, is derived from 
large -scale surveys [23,29] or smaller -scale interview 
studies [9,32] that rely heavily on self -reports [39], which 
may be limited by recall bias [21] and social desirability 
bias [16]. Only a few studies have leveraged digital trace 
data of adolescent s. In 2014, Doornwaard et al. [12] 
friended 104 Dutch adolescents on Facebook and conducted 
a content analysis of adolescent s’ friend -based interactions 
and uncovered that about a quarter of the profiles contained 
sexual and romantic references. A clear theme from the 
literature is that adolescent s frequently experience sexual 
interactions online; yet, there is still more to uncover in 
terms of how adolescent s seek support and advice regarding 
these online sexual interactions. Further, more research 
needs to examine the interplay between adolescent mental 
health, online peer support, and the online sexual 
experiences adolescent s discuss via such platforms [50]. 
The contributions of our work lie at th ese intersection s. 
METHODS  
We analyzed digital trace data from an online peer support 
platform . The platform operates primarily as a mobile app 
targeted towards youth to provide mental health support. 
The primary researcher licensed the dataset that contained 
about five million posts and 15 million comments made by 
approximately 400 thousand users. T he dates of the posts 
range d from 2011 to 2017. We anonymize d the name of the 
platform to protect the identity of the adolescent s included 
in our data analysis. Approximately 70% of the users on 
this platform are between the ages of 15 -24 with 6% (21K 
users) between the ages of 12 -15. We filtered posts by age 
to only include adolescents between the ages of 12 -17. 
While nationality was not a variable in the dataset, most of 
these youth were English speakers primarily from the 
United States, United Kingdom, a nd Europe.CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
Paper 273
Page 3Considerations for Data Ethics 
Our Institutional Review Board (IRB) determined that this 
research was exempt from human subjects’ review because 
personally identifiable information (e.g., usernames) was 
removed prior to sharing the dataset with the researchers. 
However, we still took the utmost care to preserve the 
confidentiality and privacy of the adolescent s within our 
dataset . Due to the complex nature of the dataset (e.g., 
open -ended text responses without images ), we took an 
extra precaution of requiring all research assistants who had 
access to the dataset to complete IRB CITI Training for 
working with human subjects before working on this 
project. We also made sure that any personally identif iable 
information w as removed prior to including any quotations 
within our results. We confirmed that none of the 
quotations included in this paper could be tied back to the 
original poster through a search on Google. Additionally, 
due to the explicit nature of many of the p osts (e.g., 
describing sexual assault, sexual acts, self -harming 
behaviors, etc.), we took special care to continually assess 
the mental health vulnerabilities of our research team [2]. 
As a result, we revised our scoping criteria (as discussed 
below) to remove self -harm content that was less relevant 
to this analysis and reassigned one undergraduate research 
assistant to work on anot her project that was less triggering 
for them. There were no cases where we had access to 
personally identifiable information for individuals reporting 
sexual abuse or imminent risk to a minor. Therefore, we did 
not need to invoke our status as mandated ch ild abuse 
reporters during this research project. 
Scoping and Relevancy Coding Process  
Given the dataset included over five million posts, the goal 
of our scoping process was to scale down the dataset to a 
practical size for qualitative analysis . Therefore, we focused 
our investigation on original posts (not comments) made by 
adolescent s (ages 12 -17) that discussed online sexual 
experiences, behaviors, or interactions. To do this, we first 
included search terms for popular social media platforms 
between the years 2011 to 2017 [55], which included 
Instagram, Kik, and others. Then, we searched for common 
sexual jargon used by adolescent s [46]. Next, we 
supplemented these terms through a n exploration of the 
dataset . research assistants read over 5,000 posts to 
generate a list of keywords relevant to our topic. Once we 
reached a saturation point where reading an additional 50 
posts did not result in addi tional keywords, we concluded 
this process. The final lists of keywords ( Table 1 ) were 
grouped conceptually at the intersection of “online” terms 
and “sexual” terms. The first author created a SQL query to 
identify posts that contained these terms, and the research 
team worked together to refine and optimize the query for 
relevance. The final data query resulted in a record set of 
8,271 posts made by 6,351 adolescent s. The posts were then 
divided among five research assistants for relevancy 
coding. Two inde pendent coders read each post and coded 
it based on the following inclusion criteria: Table 1: Scoping Sear ch Terms Keywords 
Online terms : Facebook, Instagram, Tinder, Bumble, Grinder, 
Snapchat, Craigslist, Skype, Hinge, Whatsapp, Kik, Discord, 
Messenger, Omegle, Vimeo, Vine, Tumblr, Myspace, 4chan, 
Reddit, forum, blog, video chat, Facetime, ft, message, dm, sent, 
send, pm, online, meet on, m et on, webcam, gaming, cyber, 
blackmail, internet, AMOSC , f2f, LMIRL 
Sexual terms : Sex, nude, naked, flirt, STI, STD, grooming, 
LDR, predator, rape, solicit, dick, threesome, 3some, pussy, 
vagina, penis, cock, cunt, anal, clit, clitros, thick, boob, breast, 
tit, nipple, oral, sodomy, finger, handjob, touch, balls, fondle, 
birth control, BCP, plan b, condom, #metoo, nonconsensual, 
pedophile, catfish, BDSM, bondage, dominant, sadism, 
masochism, lesbian, gay, cougar, smash, virgin, underage, 
minor, nsfw, make out, made out, sugarbaby, horny, LEWD, 
blowjob, BJ, friends with benefits, DFT, hentai, porn, dry hump, 
Netflix and chill, thirsty, TDTM, cum, sperm, semen, 
cunnilingus , dildo , ejacul ate, masturbate , erect, fellatio, 
foreplay, foreskin, genital, hepatitis, herpes, homo, hymen, 
IUD, lube, morning after, morning wood, libido, hickey, lick, 
one night stand, orgasm, rimming, scrotum, vibrator. 
1.  The post involved  an  online component —beyond  that  
adolescents  were posting,  and  
2.  The post discussed  sexual topics, such  as sexuality,  
sexual behaviors,  and/or  sexual experiences.  
For  example,  the post below came up  in  our  search  results  
(based  on  the words  in  bold):  
“I smashed   my iPod  by  accident and  haven't been  able  to  
get a  new one until now.  Nothing  serious....  I'm  okay :')  I'm  
hear  for  anyone who  needs  to  talk to  me...  At ANYTIME!!  
<3  Kik: [Kik  ID]”   14yr  old  Female  
The post was deemed  irrelevant because it had  an  online  
component but did  not discuss  anything  sexual (the  term  
“smashed” was not    used   in   a   sexual manner ). Posts  were 
removed  because they  were surveys  (26%),  duplicates  
(5%),  public service announcements  (e.g.,  phone numbers  
to  hotlines)  (4%),  unoriginal content  (e.g.,  song  lyrics)  
(3%),  or  were not written  in  English  (<1%).  We calculated  
Interrater  Reliability  [43]  on  our  relevancy  coding  and  
found  substantial agreement  (Cohen’s    kappa=0.71).  To  
resolve conflicts,  we formed  a consensus  among  all five  
coders.  Our  final dataset  included  4,180  relevant posts.   
Data Analysis Approach  
We conducted  a qualitative thematic analysis  [10]  of  the  
adolescent s’   posts.   First, two   independent raters    coded   10%   
(N=418)  of  the posts  to  generate initial codes for  the  
analysis.  Five research  assistants  split up  these  posts  and  
met to  form  a  consensus  across  their  codes and  create  a  
master  codebook.  Then,  two  independent coders  (of  the  
same group  of  research  assistants)  recoded  this  data  to  
confirm  IRR,  which  ranged  from  substantial agreement  
(0.71)  [43]  to  a complete agreement (1.00).  Next, the  
remainder  of  the dataset  was divided  among  the five  codersCHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
Paper 273
Page 4
for  coding.  Once  the  data coding  was complete,  the first 
author  reviewed  the codes and  used  an  axial coding  process  
[11]  to  merge  similar  codes, groups  codes conceptually  by  
theme,  and  identify  emerging  patterns.  Table 2  presents  the 
final codebook  dimensions,  themes, and  codes. To  address  
RQ1 ,  we identified  three  primary  types of  posts: 1)  Seeking  
support from  others,  2)  Trying  to  connect with  others,  and  
3)  Giving  support to  others.  Across  all three  types of  posts,  
we identified  the following  types of  sexual experiences  
(RQ2a )  being  discussed:  
•   Sexting:  Posts  that mention  sending  or  receiving  
sexually  explicit messages or  photos,  cybersex,  or  other  
sexual exchanges online.   
•   Sexual orientation:  Posts  exploring   one’s    gender    
identity  or  sexual orientation.  
•   Sexual abuse:  Posts  discussing  a sexual violation,  
harassment, abuse,  or  aggressive sexual behavior.  
•   Explicit  content:  Posts  about viewing  sexual content  
online,  such  as pornography.  
Finally,  for  the posts  that sought support about online  
sexual experiences  (N=3,474),  we identified  the following  
salient characteristics  of  the interaction  (RQ2b):  
•   Relationship  context:  The  relationship  (e.g.,  stranger,  
acquaintance,  or  dating)  between  the adolescent  and  
person  in  which  they  had  the online sexual experience.  
•   Situational context:  Whether  they  initiated  or  were  the  
recipient of  an  unwanted  solicitation.  
•   Coping  Response:  How they  responded  (e.g.,  engaged  
in  the activity,  rejected  an  advance,  or  did  nothing).  
Finally,  we analyzed  the  consequences  (RQ3 )  associated  
with  each  type of  sexual experiences,  which  included  
mental health  related  problems,  bullying  or  harassment,  
unwanted  exposure,  blackmail, or  positive feelings.  We  
allowed  for  double-coding  and  did  not apply  codes if  they  
could  not be determined  from  the post. Therefore,  
percentages in  Table 2  may  add  up  to  slightly  more or  less  Table 2:  Final Codebook  Dimensions, Themes, and  Codes  Purpose of Posts (RQ1) Seeking Support 
(83%, N=3 ,474) Trying to Connect 
(15%, N=635) Giving Advice 
(5%, N=200) 
Types of Teen Online 
Sexual Experiences (RQ2a) • Sexting (78%, N= 2 ,706) 
• Sexual orientation 
(16%, N=549) 
• Sexual abuse (8%, N=292) 
• Explicit content (7%, N=237) • Sexual orientation 
(62%, N= 392) 
• Sexting 
(37%, N=234) 
• Sexual abuse 
(5%, N=30) • Sexting 
(62%, N=123) 
• Sexual orientation 
(27%, N=54) 
• Sexual abuse 
(21%, N=42) 
Characteristics of Online 
Sexual Experiences (RQ2b) Situational context Codes : Initiator, Recipient (Unwanted) 
Relationship context Codes : Stranger, Acquaintance/Friend, Dating, Family 
Coping response Codes : Engaged, Rejected (Blocked or Reported), Did nothing 
Consequences of Online 
Sexual Experiences (RQ3) Consequences Codes: Mental Health, Bullying, Exposure, Blackmail, Positive 
Feelings 
than 100% for each dimension coded. We present our 
findings in descending order based on the frequency of the 
coded dimensions within our dataset . 
RESULTS  
In this section , we present our results. We use Table 2 as 
the over -arching structure for this section . 
Descriptive Characteristics  of Adolescent  Users   
The 4,180 posts in our analysis were made by 3,034 unique 
adolescent s. The adolescent s were between 12 and 17 years 
old, with the average age (at the time of posting) being 15 
years old. Most of the adolescent s were 16 years old 
(28.2%), while the rest were 17 (26.3%), 15 (22.3%), 14 
(15.5%), 13 (6.4%), and 12 (1.3%). Most of the posts were 
from female users (73%), with 16 % from males, and 11% 
from non -binary or unspecified gender individuals . About 
38% of the posts were posted anonymously. These 
adolescent s had been active for an average of 7.5 months 
from the date they posted in the dataset . On average, the 
adolescent s posted 206 original posts ( SD = 436) and 898 
comments ( SD = 2,040). About a quarter of the posts (26%) 
specifically mentioned using other s ocial media platforms. 
Of these posts, the majority mentioned Kik (43%), followed 
by the peer support platform (15%), Snapchat (12%), 
Instagram (8%), Facebook (8%), Skype (4%), Tumblr 
(4%), and Omegle (2%). Adolescent s disclosed mental -
health issues (18%), that they engage in self -harming 
behaviors (5%) , and they thought about or attempted 
suicide (4%). They also mentioned that they have other 
mental health issues such as anxiety, personality disorders, 
etc. (4%). Adolescent s posted on a range of topics, 
including their offline sexual experiences, relationship 
advice, hopes and dreams, family, dieting, mental health, 
self-harm, and suicidal ideation. However, we made the 
explicit choice to not conduct a person -based analysis that 
could unintentionally aggreg ate disaggregated data in a way 
that would make an individual adolescent identifiable.CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
Paper 273
Page 5Seeking Support for Online Sexual Experiences 
Adolescent s who sought support spoke generally to the 
crowd —asking everyone for advice, sharing their intimate 
personal ex periences, or were just venting, so they could be 
heard . They openly complained about their problems, 
shared their stories, and recounted awkward situations for 
which they explicitly sought support and/or advice. We 
identified four different types of onlin e sexual experiences 
for which adolescent s sought support: 1) Sexting (78% of 
support seeking posts, N=2 ,706), 2) Sexual Orientation 
(16%, N=549), 3) Sexual Abuse (8%, N=292), and 4) 
Explicit Content (7%, N=237). In the subsections below, 
we describe each type of support seeking in more depth. 
Seeking Support about Sexting  
The most prevalent type of sexual interaction for which 
adolescent s sought support was sexting. Of the posts about 
sexting, 66% involved requests to exchange sexual 
messages and/or nude photographs or videos. The other 
43% discussed cybersex via real -time messaging or video -
sharing apps. First, we analyzed these posts to understand 
the situational context of the experience —whether the 
adolescent said they were the initiator or recipient o f the 
request. In almost half of the posts (46%) adolescent s said 
that they received a request, rather than being the initiator 
(19%). Of the sexting posts where the adolescent was the 
recipient, 61% implied that the exchange was unwanted: 
“GAH! I can't believe that I was talking to a guy for 5 
minutes and out of nowhere he just sends me a naked pic. 
THE FUCK?! Honestly, WHY? ” 13yr old Female 
In cases where users initiated the interaction, they often 
thought sexting might bring their relationship to the next 
level. Sometimes, they offered to send nudes to a romantic 
partner but did not receive the response that they were 
expecting. Therefore, they sought advice on how to 
interpret the situation, after it took an unexpected turn: 
“I have been going ou t with my boyfriend for like 5 months 
now and we haven't done anything past kissing. I offered to 
send a nude a few nights ago and he got really pissed and 
said how I shouldn't send nudes to people. we haven't talked 
since. Confused!?!?” 14yr old Female 
In these situations, adolescent s (mostly females) were often 
more concerned about how the sexting interaction changed 
the nature of their relationships with others, rather than the 
repercussions from having engaged in sexting itself. Other 
times, they posted because they sent a nude photo or 
engaged in cybersex, but then something negative happened 
(e.g., someone sharing the nude images to others at school) 
to make them regret their own actions. Youth sought advice 
on how to recover from these types of mistak es: 
“I sent nudes to my friend. I know it's stupid but the 
compliments were so nice and made me not hate myself for 
a while, I trusted him …at school he showed half my grade. 
In so embarrassed I cut when I got home and filled the tub with  blood …I  hate him so  much,  but I  hate myself more.  
Please  help  :(“ 15yr   old   Female   
In  most cases,  when  adolescents  said  they  initiated  a sexting  
interaction,  they  expressed  doubt, regret,  and  confusion.  
Their  posts  reflected  the  need  to  get feedback  from  others  
on  how to  recover  from  these situations.  
Next, we explored  the relationship  context  between  the  
youth  and  the  people  in  which  the sexual exchange  
occurred.  Most of  the  posts  for  sexting  were  regarding  
interactions  with  strangers  (37%).  Adolescents  complained  
about unsolicited  nudes and  sexual advances  and  expressed  
disappointment that people just wanted  to  use them  as a  
sexual object,  rather  than  get  to  know them  for  who  they  
were. When  they  talked  about sexting  requests  from  
strangers,  they  were more  likely  to  complain  that the  
request seemed  out  of  the blue or  random.  They  were less  
likely  to  feel pressured  or  to  reciprocate in  the exchange.  In  
contrast,  30% of  the posts  involved  sexting  interactions  
with  a romantic interest.  Usually,  adolescents  asked  for  
advice on  how to  navigate sexting  within  their  
relationships.  Male adolescents  were more  likely  to  ask  for  
advice on  why  sexting  exchanges stopped  with  a romantic  
partner,  implying  they  wanted  the interactions  to  continue:  
 “My girlfriend  and  I  are long  distance  and  before she met  
me in  person  we  often  did  sexual things  on  Skype.  Ever  
since  she went back  home we  haven ’t done  anything:/  Any  
advice ” 17yr   old   Male   
Meanwhile,  many  adolescents  expressed  excitement and  
nervousness  when  sexting  became a part of  their  
relationships.  They  were curious  about these new  sexual  
experiences  and  concerned  about doing  it safely:  
“I  just sexted  with  my boyfriend  for  the  first time and  he's 
14  and  I'm  15  but omg.  idk.  it was  actually kinda  fun...I  
haven't sent any nudes. so  I'm  safe…agh.  idk.  can't tell 
anyone  cuz  then  they'd  judge me. ” 16yr    old   Femal e  
Yet,  females were also  often  frustrated  that they  were being  
pressured  to  share nudes, and  scared  that if  they  did  not,  
they  would  be rejected  by  their  love interest:  
 “I  am worthless.  All my bf like me for  one stupid  thing.  
Nudes pics. And  when  I  refuse  to  send  them they  brake  up  w  
me!  I  want to  slit my  wrist so  bad!” 15yr   old   Female   
Females  were also  confused  by  their  male friends,  who  
made unwanted  advances,  struggling  to  set boundaries:  
“One of my best friends    from school is    getting   really 
weird...  He  was  talking  about sending  me dick pics and  now  
he's  telling  me he's  really hôrny...  I've just stopped  replying  
because I  don't  want to  go  there with  him...  He means  to  
much   to   me...   Can   I   just ignore him?”   17yr  old  Female  
We were also  interested  in  understanding  how adolescents 
coped  with  or  responded  to  these sexting  situations.  For  the  
posts  in  which  they  were recipients,  most of  them  (33%)  
did  not engage  in  the interaction  (i.e.,  did  not send  nudes  orCHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
Paper 273
Page 6sexual messages). When the initiator of the request was a 
stranger (sometimes another user on the platform), it was 
easier for them to voice their desire not to engage: 
“There's a guy I message off here …he keeps trying to sext 
me and I'm constantly making it 100% clear I don't want to 
do that ” 14yr old Female 
Others either blocked or used in -app reporting features to 
stave off the unwanted request. Often, youth posted their 
annoyance about having to deal with unwanted solicitations 
when they were already dealing with other stressors. 
“Some annoying fuck boy just sent me a dick pic. I blocked 
and reported him …this day has been annoying overall and 
he is the last thing I really needed.” 15yr old Female 
Some (16%) did not take any actions in response to 
receiving a sexting request or receiving nudes. Th is 
occurred more often when the adolescent knew the person 
who made the request. For instance, when the initiator was 
an acquaintance, friend, or romantic interest. In these cases, 
they often ignored the request or receipt of nude material 
because they did not want to damage the relationship: 
“The guy I really like keeps messaging me, he’s really nice 
but he keeps sending dick pics. I ignore them but he carries 
on…like wtf do I do?! ’ 17yr old Female 
Meanwhile , 15% of the posts indicated that adolescent s 
actively participated in the sexting exchange after someone 
else initiated it. Adolescent s (mostly females) expressed 
regret (similar to when they initiated the exchange) and 
reflected on how they felt pressured. In some cases, they 
said that others threaten ed to self -harm or kill themselves if 
they did not comply with the request to send nudes: 
“My friend told me she would kill herself if I didn't send her 
a nude I feel used yet again I did it but... Idk what to 
feel anymore ” 14yr old Female 
Adolescent s also received nude picture s from someone else 
(usually someone they knew), which made them aroused, so 
they reciprocated. Then, they sought advice on how to 
interpret how this might affect their relationships: 
“So I've liked this guy for 6 years and he's lik e my best 
friend and we love each other so much but like as friends. 
He's 14. And he just asked me to send pictures to him. Like 
naked.... And he sent me a pic of his d**k and it kinda 
turned me on. I kinda sent him a pic back. What does that 
mean?” 14yr old Female 
Many of the posts highlighted the complicated relationships 
within the adolescent s’ lives, where best friends sometimes 
tried to cross the line to make the friendship sexual. Often, 
when they posted about sending/receiving nudes to others, 
even their romantic partners, they expressed reluctance, 
ambivalence, and guilt, asking advice as to whether they 
should be sending explicit photos at all . Peer-pressure 
emerged as a common theme, where female adolescent s felt like they had to exchange sexual images with their love 
interest if they wanted the relationship to continue: 
“He finally said I love you. But then right after he started 
asking for nudes. And i realized that he only said it so I'd 
send him nudes. I don't want to but I'm scared he'll break 
up with me ” 14yr old Female 
In summary, adolescent s often sought support about 
unwanted sex ting solicitations from strangers but struggled 
the most when these solicitations came from people they 
knew . Next , we discuss the characteristics of the adolescent 
posts which sought support for their sexual orientation. 
Seeking Support for Ones’ Sexual O rientation or Identity 
Within the support seeking posts, 16% (N=549) were posts 
where adolescent s were asking advice as they explored their 
sexual identity. These posts were often made by Lesbian, 
Gay, Bi -sexual, Transgendered, and/or Queer (LGBTQ) 
adolesc ents, or those who were still figuring out their sexual 
orientation. The situational context of these posts varied 
significantly from the posts about sexting; in most cases, 
adolescent s were the were initiator (44%) rather than the 
recipient (21%). Unlike support seeking posts about 
sexting, posts about sexual identity and orientation often 
did not involve another party, so adolescent s were simply 
posting about their own experiences, so that others could 
help them disentangle their thoughts and emotions: 
“So I feel very confused about my sexuality. I've had 
crushes on guys (I'm a girl) and I've never had a crush on a 
girl, I think lots of girls are hot/sexy/beautiful ect. And if I 
see a dick on tumblr, it just freaks me out and I just don't 
like it at all re ally. If anyone could help me "find myself" 
that would be great .” 13yr old Female 
Adolescent s who posted about being the recipient of 
interaction about their sexual orientation often described a 
cyberbullying situation (see Consequences for more 
details). When we coded based on relationship context , 
27% of such messages came from strangers. In some 
instances, random people tried to convince adolescent s that 
they were wrong about their own sexual identity: 
“A guy I didn't know messaged me on kik asking me out 
after talking to me for twenty minutes. When I told him no 
and that I don't like guys he said that I don't know that and 
that being gay could be cured anyways. He kept trying to 
convince me that I wasn't gay. He then proceeded to tell me 
that I'm just a girl with tomboyish tendencies and that I'm 
just childish when I told him I was gender fluid... ” 17yr old 
Non-binary Adolescent 
In about 26% of the posts, adolescent s asked for advice 
about mixed messages t hey received from friends and/or 
acquaintances that made them question their friend’s sexual 
orientation, and sometimes , even their own: 
“My best friend sends me nudes and flirts with me a lot 
when i ask her if she likes girls she says no .but that doesn' tCHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
Paper 273
Page 7make any sense? and i kinda like her.btw im bi wtf help 
” 15yr old Female 
Fewer posts described a situation with a romantic partner 
(9%). In these cases, adolescent s in non -heteronormative 
relationships sought advice on how to navigate 
disrespectful qu estions about their relationships: 
“So Im dating this girl and we're constantly asked 'who's 
the man in the relationship?' I'm pissed cause 1st off were 
both females…Neither of us have figured out who is either 
submissive or dominate in this relationship …I didn't want 
shit like this.” 15yr old Female 
In some cases (7%), posters described their challenges 
regarding their families. They expressed gratitude that they 
could come to the internet for advice when their families 
were not understanding. They wanted help on how to come 
out to their families . These adolescent s expressed relief that 
they were receiving support for their choices and wanted to 
share that relief with others in the support community. In 
summary, they used the online peer support platform to 
explore their sexual identities and get advice on how to 
interpret their own internal struggles around gender and 
sexuality, as well as how to deal with how this identity 
affected their interactions with others, both on and offline. 
Support Seeking for Se xual Abuse 
A relatively small number of posts sought support for 
online sexual abuse (8% N=292). Some of these posts were 
about online sexual interactions leading to rape, while 
others described cyber -violations that emotionally harmed 
the adolescent given past sexual abuse. Since the posts were 
categorized as abuse, adolescent s were in all cases the 
recipient of the sexual interaction, rather than the initiator. 
Many of these posts were significantly longer than posts in 
the previous categories, often usin g a narrative approach to 
tell their stories, as there was a lot for these adolescent s to 
unpack. In several cases, posts that would have otherwise 
been classified as unwanted sexting interactions were coded 
as abuse due to the adolescent s’ personal histor y and 
emotional trauma. Often, someone unintentionally brought 
back memories of past sexual abuse that made the 
adolescent s feel vulnerable, violated, and triggered: 
“EEEEW!!!! some guy just randomly messaged me on Kik 
and asked if i had a big... i cant ev en stand to say it... i was 
raped when i was five and the dude that did that to me... 
kept saying "look at you, you have a peanut!!!!" 
#ImScared ” 16yr old Male 
In other cases, the unwanted interaction was with an adult 
that the adolescent knew and realized that the behavior was 
inappropriate. Below, the 16 -year-old female asked the 
community whether she should entrap her predator to get 
him “sent down,” or whether doing this would be wrong: 
“There's a man who's is my dads friend…he just asked me 
to send h im a pic of me in my bra. Am I doing a bad thing 
or carry on and get him sent down? Obviously I have been abused as a child and I hate pedophiles I'm just helping 
clear the world if a sicko I'm 15 he's 40 he has been 
messaging me for over a year.” 16yr old Female 
In terms of relationship context , 45% of the posts involved 
a stranger. These adolescent s recounted situations where 
they were forced to engage with someone else sexually 
online, often years after the abuse occurred: 
“i was 11 when some 2 0 something year old man forced me 
to send him nudes and forced me to do gross things on 
facetime, telling me he’d kill me if i didn’t, or that he’d send 
a video of me watching him jack off to all my contacts. ” 
16yr old Male 
About 21% of the posts involved acquaintances. In these 
cases, the abuse occurred both online and offline. Like the 
previous example, posters often felt forced into a situation 
they could not control. Sometimes this involved past 
consensual interactions that the adolescent later regrett ed. 
They posted because they felt trapped and scared. 
“Ive been sexually abused/harassed online and in real life 
by these guys at my school but i can't actually get help 
because i... Did some stuff with one of them so if i try to tell 
someone, they have bl ackmail on me, and i could 
potentially get arrested and im terrified .” 15yr old 
Unspecified Gender 
Another 17% of the online sexual abuse posts involved a 
significant other. Again, these posts often co -mingled 
offline and online abuse that happened in the past with an 
“ex.” Adolescent s felt triggered and needed somewhere to 
share and these traumatic experiences. A small percentage 
(7%) of adolescent s posts mentioned online sexual abuse 
involving a family member (e.g., parents, siblings, uncles) . 
“so last n ight I asked my brother if he wanted to smoke 
weed with me he said no so then after awhile he asked for 
my snapchat I gave it to him he asked me if I wanted to see 
his dick I said WHAT ” 14yr old Female 
A concerning trend across the sexual abuse posts was that 
the poster did not indicate reporting the abuse to the proper 
authorities. This was often because they felt trapped by 
their abusers or ashamed by their own actions. 
Seeking Support for Sexually Explicit Content 
The least common (7%, N=231) type of sexual interaction 
for which they sought support was sexually explicit content. 
In about 29% of the posts, they were the recipients of 
explicit content, while in 23% of the posts they consumed 
pornography at their own v olition. In the posts where 
adolescent s were the recipients, 19% indicated that the 
interaction was unwanted. In most cases, they complained 
about unwanted explicit content showing up in their social 
media feeds from the people they were connected to onlin e: 
“I'm sick off it seening half naked, nude, bra and undies on 
my feed Instagram, Facebook and everywhere. It's so 
disgusting ” 17yr old FemaleCHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
Paper 273
Page 8Adolescent s also described situations that occurred with an 
acquaintance (15%) or romantic partner (15%). In these 
cases, they were often being pressured to consume sexually 
explicit content for the benefit of the relationship: 
“I have a fear of sex and nudity. My boyfriend is nice he 
wanted to help me…He asked me to watch porn because he 
thought watching it wou ld make me less scared. But turns 
out I got even more scared. ” 15yr old Female 
In summary, we discussed support seeking for different 
sexual categories and their characteristics. Next, we discuss 
the consequences of online sexual experiences. 
The Consequences of Online Sexual Experiences 
Next, we explored the consequences identified in the posts 
after adolescents were involved in online sexual interaction. 
Negatively Impacted Mental Health 
Many posts explicitly or implicitly described how online 
sexual experience negatively impacted the adolescent ’s 
mental health. This was most prevalent within sexual abuse 
posts (48%) , where adolescent s described emotional and 
mental trauma, combined with g uilt, shame, and fear : 
“I've been raped by a guy I met online. I thought it would 
never happen to be because I wasn't really insecure... I've 
been chatting with him for 1 1/2 years before he wanted to 
meet... It's all my fault. I feel awful.” 15yr old Fema le 
This sentiment was also present in 35% of the sexting posts 
when shared images were later used against them : 
“i sent a nude to my now ex bf bout a year ago and he sent 
it to ppl and every1 keeps calling me a thot and just the 
worst things u could imagin e at school i already planned 
everything out for suicidie” 13yr old Female 
For explicit content, t he most common mental health 
problem (29%) was addictive behaviors that made 
adolescent s feel out -of-control and ashamed : 
“Sending nudes is a bad thing? As l ong as watching porn? 
I'm a 14 year old girl and I want to stop doing the two of 
them but I always fail and feel really bad ” 15yr old Female 
When adolescent s revealed their sexual orientation, they 
were often ostracized or ridiculed by others , which 
negati vely impacted their mental health (24%) . Losing the 
support of friends and family during a critical time in their 
sexual development was detrimental to their self -esteem: 
“Bisexual and ashamed my friend blocked me off snapchat 
told all her friends they sta rted removing me off their friend 
list just because I came out I cAnt even look in the mirror of 
myself ” 16yr old Female 
Mental health consequences ranged greatly —from mild 
embarrassment, rage, hopelessness, self -harm, to suicidal 
ideation and actual at tempts on the adolescent ’s life. Online Harassment Resulting from Sexual Interactions 
Being bullied was also a direct consequence of online 
sexual experiences . In 15% of the online sexual abuse posts 
and 4% of sexting posts , insult was added to injury when 
the adolescent s’ sexual abuse was recorded and shared with 
others, who then ridiculed them for being promiscuous or 
damaged goods: 
“I was sexually assaulted my an ex I had and he put my 
assault on video and showed a bunch of people...which led 
me to being sexually harassed at school ... the guy is now 
my ex and he's texting me saying that I'm a santa and a hoe 
for being sexually assaulted .” 15yr old Female 
In some cases, this hurt the adolescent s’ reputation and led 
to nam e-calling . Some more extreme cases often occurred 
once an intimate or trust relationship degraded to the point 
where the offending party used the digital imagery as a 
form of revenge porn or sextortion. 
Other posts mentioned being bullied because of sexua l 
orientation (10%). Adolescent s complained recounted 
receiving hate messages from the people who harassed 
them over their sexual identity or orientation : 
“Ok so I'm gay... And some how some random person found 
that out and messaged me that I'm a stupid as s lesbian and 
I should go die in a hole... And I'm fuck sick and tired of 
you people who can't accept other people that are apart of 
the LGBT+ community. ” 12yr old Female 
Harassment compounded the problems adolescent s 
experienced when trying to understand their sexual identity . 
Positive Outcomes of Online Sexual Interactions 
Although most posts indicated negative consequences from 
adolescent s’ online sexual experiences (at least the ones 
they posted about in which to garner support), some 
adolescent s expre ssed positive outcomes. For instance, 
sexting gave them pleasure or made them feel good about 
pleasing others when other life -situations made life seem 
depressing. To this extent, sexting was used as a coping 
mechanism to get some relief and a sense of emp owerment. 
“Recently I've found myself wanting to start to send nudes 
again. I know I shouldn't, it's illegal and over all just a 
thing that could come back and haunt me. I just feel so out 
of control with my life and so worthless at the moment that 
at leas t if I can give someone some sort of pleasure it'll 
make me stop feeling this way.” 16yr old Female 
In the next section , we describe the posts where adolescent s 
were trying to connect with others . 
Trying to Connect with Others  
In addition to seeking support, some adolescent s posted 
because they wanted to connect directly with others (15% 
N=635). These posts differed from support seeking posts 
because the adolescent s were explicitly trying to make one -
to-one connections for suppo rt, rather than seeking it 
broadly from the crowd. Most of these posts (62%, N=392)CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
Paper 273
Page 9were from LGBTQ youth trying to connect with other 
LGBTQ, while other posts were adolescent s trying to make 
friends (37%, N=234) or to talk to someone else who was 
also sex ually abused (5%, N=30). A common type of post 
in this category was a n adolescent stating their sexual 
orientation and providing their Kik user ID to have other 
youth s of that orientation contact them . In some cases, 
adolescent s wanted to talk to someone w ho could help them 
come out to their families: 
“Is anyone else bisexual on here? Need some advice, I 
don't know how to come out to my family. Could you leave 
your Kiks below. Thankyou ” 15yr old Female 
Several posts came from frustrated adolescent s, who 
wanted to connect with others on a meaningful level but 
wanted to avoid sexual solicitations. These posts indicate d 
that even though this platform was for support , adolescent s 
often received unwanted sexual solicitations instead: 
“Y'know what I really hate..? When I say on here "I really 
want to talk to someone." and when I do all they want to do 
is sext or send dirty pictures. I really do want to just 
TALK..” 15yr old Female 
Females were particularly forlorn that they were not 
receiving the support they came there to get: 
“I just feel so lonely. Nobody really talks to me and when 
they do talk to me all they want from me is sex… I don't 
want to talk about sex and sending nudes…I want to talk 
about my problems without getting shut down abou t how 
I'm just complaining just to complain. ” 16yr old Female 
Some male users even acknowledged that most guys 
seemed to come to the platform to engage in sexual 
interactions. As a result, “guys” who joined the platform to 
make friends and talk had a hard time connecting with 
overly cautious “girls .” In the next section, we discuss the 
posts that aim to provide advice to others. 
Giving Advice to Others  
There was a small portion of posts (5%, N=200) that gave 
advice to others about online sexual risks. Of th ese posts, 
(62%) gave others advice on how to deal with unwanted 
sexting solicitations and even bad actors on the platform 
itself. Posts often included a general plea, an expression of 
frustration, and/or actionable advice on how to avoid such 
unwanted int eractions . Other posts specifically warned 
other s about users that they had negative interactions with 
in the past, so that they could stay away from predators: 
“Stay the hell away from [ID] he is a perv all he wants is 
for girls to send him nudes he found my Kik on here and 
started texting me... ” 14yr old female 
Other adolescent s posted pleas to potential offenders telling 
them to go elsewhere and not prey on vulnerable people . 
DISCUSSION  
We discuss the implications of our findings and present 
design rec ommendations for online peer support platforms. Online Sexual Experiences  as  the New Norm  
Exploring one’s sexuality is a normal and healthy part of 
adolescen ce [19], and a s adolescent s spend more time 
online, online sexual experiences have become a normal 
part of their lives. Adolescent s in our dataset often treated 
online sexual interactions as if they were a natural 
progression of romantic relationship s. Similar to offline 
sexual int eractions [44], adolescent s in our study wanted 
help navigating these situations and were desperate ly 
reaching out to strangers for advice on how best to handle 
serious life decisions . Unfortunately, while there are 
extensive resources for adolescent s to learn about healthy 
versus risky sexual experiences offline [27], the risk 
narrative around online sexual interactions has limited 
sexual health resources for these interactions from 
becoming a mainstream part of sex education . We 
recommend a societal shift that acknowledges that online 
sexual interactions are now part of a adolescents’ everyday 
life; therefore, we need to teach adolescents how to engage 
in these sexual experiences safely . We urge r esearchers and 
practitioners to advocate for safe online sexual education 
for adolescent s. For instance, educators could help 
adolescent s weigh the benefits and risks of sexting and 
discuss safety and exit strategies. 
The Double-Edge Sword of Online Peer Support  
Our analysis uncovered that adolescent s, specifically, ones 
struggling with their mental health, sexual ity, and 
technology -mediated relationships , came to this online 
platfor m to seek support . Vulnerable youth (e.g., LGTBQ 
and survivors of sexual abuse) often reached out to others 
directly for help and to form personal connections based on 
shared life experiences . In this way, the platform 
empowered adolescent s, gave them hope, a sense of 
commu nity, and belonging —all positive characteristics that 
have been associated with online mental health peer support 
platforms [38]. Yet , while these adolescent s were exposing 
their most intimate thoughts, desires, and personal details 
(e.g., Kik IDs) to re ceive support from their network , they 
also received unwanted sexual advances from strangers to 
the point that some adolescent s posted to warn others about 
malicious users. Essentially, the platform was exposing 
adolescent s to some of the same harmful expe riences they 
were there to overcome. This raises the question as to 
whether the benefits of online peer support outweigh the 
potential risks —or how we might design these platforms in 
a way that optimizes benefits and mitigates risks. Therefore, 
we offer some recommendations for designing online peer 
support platforms to better meet the needs of adolescent s. 
Implications for Design  
While the anonymity of the platform gave adolescent s the 
opportunit y to discuss topics they normally did not feel 
comfortable talking about in the real world , it also placed 
them at higher risk . One of the main themes that emerged in 
this paper was the problem of adolescent s encountering 
“bad actors” [8] as they sought peer support and social 
connection with others online . A possible solution forCHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
Paper 273
Page 10combating bad actors is to create safe spaces that are 
designed specifically for adolescents to have frank 
conversations about their online sexual experiences. These 
peer support platforms could be membership restricted by 
age and re al identity but facilitate support through 
anonymity. Further, online peer support platforms could 
implement peer -based affinity spaces [1] that are restricted 
to adolescents who identify with certain groups (e.g., 
LGBTQ, females, by age, etc.). These affinity space s might 
safeguard youth from encountering unwanted solicitations 
or online harassment about their sexual orientation. Ideally, 
these platforms would be moderated by trained peer 
counselors and sexual health professionals that understand 
the types of sexual interactions teens encounter online, so 
that parents can be assured that their adolescents are getting 
sound advice. Making such online resources accessible for 
adolescents could prevent them from going to less reputable 
websites or niche websites (such a s ones geared towards 
mental health issues ) to seek peer support. We might also 
reflect on whether designing platforms specifically for safe 
consensual sexting for adolescents would be beneficial. 
While th e platform studied was moderated and had clear 
community standards against online harassment and 
solicitations, it was clear from the posts that unwanted 
interactions that violat ed these standards still occurred. This 
problem could potentially be alleviated by levera ging 
machine learning approaches to identify such violations. 
For instance, Wohn et al. [54,56] recently proposed 
leveraging human -technology partnerships and algorithmic 
systems to alleviate the burden of human moderators. 
Combining this approach with Wisniewski’s and De 
Choudhury ’s [57] concurrent efforts to create human -
centered algorithms [45] to accurately detect adolescent 
online risks, could be a novel approach to ensuring the 
online safety of adolescents seeking online peer support. As 
such, an interesting design im plication and future research 
problem is determining how human -centered approaches to 
machine learning could be used to disentangle online sexual 
abuse from other forms of normal online sexual exploration 
to improve risk detection. For instance, we found t hat 
relationship context was a salient feature in unequivocally 
unwanted sexual solicitations. Therefore, accurately 
classifying or allowing adolescents to categorize individuals 
as known or unknown contacts would help automated 
approaches distinguish betw een unwanted solicitations and 
more nuanced interactions. Such algorithms could then be 
embedded in peer support and/or social media platforms, so 
that these platforms share the social responsibility of 
protecting adolescents from sexual exploitation, whil e not 
inhibiting them from seeking support for or engaging in 
developmentally appropriate sexual behaviors online. 
Additionally , posts often disclosed sexual abuse, self -
harming behaviors, and suicidal thoughts. Similar human -
centered risk detection approa ches could help identify these 
imminent risks to youth and offer real -time support and 
provide evidence -based interventions to mitigate harm . Limitations and Future Research 
Our analysis was based on posts made by adolescent s on a 
mental health -oriented p eer support platform for 
adolescent s and young adults. Therefore, our results may 
not be generalizable to other population s. We likely 
encountered more negatively biased sexual experiences and 
abuse narratives given the nature of the platform. Future 
research should verify whether our results hold for more 
diverse adolescent populations. Second, the challenge of 
scaling big dat a for qualitative research is an open problem 
that multiple researchers in the SIGCHI community are 
currently trying to tackle [15,58] . Our dataset was scoped 
based on a grounded and iterative process of manually 
identifying relevant keywords in the data . It is possible that 
other relevant keywords exist but were not included in our 
query. For instance, the word “fuck” was intentionally 
removed because this sexualized language has become 
prevalent in youths ’ everyday discourse and resulted in a 
high number of irrelevant posts. 
Most importan tly, how to ethically conduct online research, 
particularly with vulnerable population [49] is an important 
open issue within the SIGCHI community that warrants 
continuous sc rutiny [22]. Hallinan et al. [22] explains that 
there is no single solution to ensuring ethical research and 
one must think about the beneficence (i.e., benefits versus 
risks) of one’s research “holistically .” For instance, we 
considered the public’s expectations of the platform based 
on the site’s terms of service, which stated that the data may 
be used for research purposes. Yet, we felt this was 
insufficient protection by itself, which is why we made sure 
that our quotations were anonymized and not publicly 
searchable as to mitigate potential harm to the youth whose 
data we analyzed . For ou r future work, we plan to take the 
same care in examin ing the types of peer support and 
advice adolescents receive from strangers (i.e., comments 
on these posts) about these experiences . 
CONCLUSION  
The key take -away from this research is that online sexual 
interactions need to become part of the everyday discourse 
when educating adolescents about safe sex. We investigated 
the online sexual experiences of adolescents using real -
world posts from a peer support platform. We found that 
online sexual experiences have become an irrevocable part 
of adolescent s’ sexual development and identified some of 
the benefits and challenges adolescent s encounter when 
seeking support for these experiences . 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
We thank Amy Godfrey, Maria Lopez, Hannah Main, and 
Madison Maynard, who assisted with data coding. This 
research is partially supported by the U.S. National Science 
Foundation under grants IIP-1827700 and IIS-1844881 and 
by the William T. Grant Foundation grant #187941 . Any 
opinion s, findings, and conclusions or recommendations 
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do 
not necessarily reflect the views of the research sponsors.CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
Paper 273
Page 11REFERENCES 
[1] Mona Humaid Aljanahi. 2019. “You Could Say I’m a 
Hardcore Fan of Dragon Ball Z”: Affinity Spaces, 
Multiliteracies, and the Negotiation of Identity. 
Literacy Research and Instruction 58, 1: 31 –48. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/19388071.2018.1520940 
[2] Nazanin Andalibi and Andrea Forte. 2015. Social 
Computing Researchers As Vulnerable Populations. 
[3] Nazanin Andalibi, Oliver L. Haimson, Munmun De 
Choudhury, and Andrea Forte. 2018. Social Suppo rt, 
Reciprocity, and Anonymity in Responses to Sexual 
Abuse Disclosures on Social Media. ACM Trans. 
Comput. -Hum. Interact. 25, 5: 28:1 –28:35. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3234942 
[4] Nazanin Andalibi, Oliver L. Haimson, Munmun De 
Choudhury, and Andrea Forte. 20 16. Understanding 
Social Media Disclosures of Sexual Abuse Through 
the Lenses of Support Seeking and Anonymity. In 
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems -CHI ’16, 3906 – 
3918. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858096 
[5] Monica Anderson and Jingjing Jiang. 2018. Teens, 
Social Media & Technology 2018 | Pew Research 
Center. Retrieved September 22, 2018 from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2018/05/31/teens -social -
media -technology -2018/ 
[6] Karla Badillo -Urquiola, Xinru Page, and Pamela 
Wisniewski. 2019. Risk vs. Restriction: The Tension 
between Providing a Sense of Normalcy and Keeping 
Foster Teens Safe Online. In The ACM CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems . 
[7] Lindsay Blackwell, Emma Gardiner, and Sarita 
Schoen ebeck. 2016. Managing Expectations: 
Technology Tensions Among Parents and Teens. In 
Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on 
Computer -Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing (CSCW ’16), 1390 –1401. 
[8] Lindsay Blackwell, Mark Handel, Sarah T. Roberts , 
Amy Bruckman, and Kimberly Voll. 2018. 
Understanding “Bad Actors” Online. In Extended 
Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’18), 
W21:1 –W21:7. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3170610 
[9] danah boyd. It’s Compl icated: The Social Lives of 
Networked Teens . Yale University Press. Retrieved 
September 11, 2019 from 
http://journals.openedition.org/lectures/17628 
[10] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2012. Thematic 
analysis. In APA handbook of research methods in 
psychology, Vol 2: Research designs: Quantitative, 
qualitative, neuropsychological, and biological . American Psychological Association, Washington, 
DC, US, 57 –71. https://doi.org/10.1037/13620 -004 
[11] Juliet M. Corbin and Anselm Strauss. 1990. 
Grounded theo ry research: Procedures, canons, and 
evaluative criteria. Qualitative Sociology 13, 1: 3 –21. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00988593 
[12] Suzan M. Doornwaard, Megan A. Moreno, Regina J. 
J. M. van den Eijnden, Ine Vanwesenbeeck, and Tom 
F. M. ter Bogt. 2014. You ng Adolescents’ Sexual and 
Romantic Reference Displays on Facebook. Journal 
of Adolescent Health 55, 4: 535 –541. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2014.04.002 
[13] Nicola Döring. 2014. Consensual sexting among 
adolescents: Risk prevention through abstin ence 
education or safer sexting? Cyberpsychology: 
Journal of Psychosocial Research on Cyberspace 8, 
1. Retrieved September 21, 2018 from 
https://cyberpsychology.eu/article/view/4303 
[14] Keith F. Durkin and Clifton D. Bryant. 1995. “Log 
on to sex”: Some no tes on the carnal computer and 
erotic cyberspace as an emerging research frontier. 
Deviant Behavior 16, 3: 179 –200. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01639625.1995.9967998 
[15] Casey Fiesler, Jed Brubaker, Andrea Forte, Shion 
Guha, Nora McDonald, and Michael Muller. 2019. 
Qualitative Methods for CSCW: Challenges and 
Opportunities. 455 –460. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3311957.3359428 
[16] Robert J. Fisher. 1993. Social Desirability Bias and 
the Validity of Indirect Questioning. Journal of 
Consumer Research 20, 2: 303 –315. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/209351 
[17] Andrea Forte, Michael Dickard, Rachel Magee, and 
Denise E. Agosto. 2014. What do teens ask their 
online social networks?: social search practices 
among high school students. In Proceedings of the 
17th ACM conference on Computer supported 
cooperative work & social computing -CSCW ’14 , 
28–37. https://doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531723 
[18] Manuel Gámez -Guadix, Carmen Almendros, Esther 
Calvete, and Patricia De Santisteban. 2018. 
Persuasion strategies and sexual solicitations and 
interactions in online sexual grooming of 
adolescents: Modeling direct and indirect pathways. 
Journal of Adolescence 63: 11 –18. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adolescence.2017.12.002 
[19] Howard Earl Gardner and Katie Davis. 2013. The 
App Generation: How To day’s Youth Navigate 
Identity, Intimacy, and Imagination in a Digital 
World . Social Science Research Network, Rochester, 
NY. Retrieved September 19, 2019 from 
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2982119CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
Paper 273
Page 12[20] Arup Kumar Ghosh. 2016. Taking a More Balanced 
Appr oach to Adolescent Mobile Safety. In 
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on 
Supporting Group Work (GROUP ’16), 495–498. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2957276.2997025 
[21] A. Gorin and Arthur Stone. 2001. Recall biases and 
cognitive errors in retrospective self reports: A call 
for momentary assessments. 
[22] Blake Hallinan, Jed R Brubaker, and Casey Fiesler. 
2019. Unexpected expectations: Public reaction to the 
Facebook emo tional contagion study. New Media & 
Society : 1461444819876944. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444819876944 
[23] Lisa M. Jones, Kimberly J. Mitchell, and David 
Finkelhor. 2012. Trends in Youth Internet 
Victimization: Findings From Three Youth Internet 
Safety Surveys 2000 –2010. Journal of Adolescent 
Health 50, 2: 179 –186. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2011.09.0 15 
[24] MPH Joseph A. Dake PhD, MPH James H. Price 
PhD, MSN Lauren Maziarz RN, and Britney Ward 
MPH. 2012. Prevalence and Correlates of Sexting 
Behavior in Adolescents. American Journal of 
Sexuality Education 7, 1: 1 –15. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15546128.20 12.650959 
[25] Melissa Kang and Susan Quine. 2007. Young 
people’s concerns about sex: unsolicited questions to 
a teenage radio talkback programme over three years. 
Sex Education 7, 4: 407 –420. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14681810701636010 
[26] Jung -Eun Kim, Em ily C. Weinstein, and Robert L. 
Selman. 2017. Romantic Relationship Advice From 
Anonymous Online Helpers: The Peer Support 
Adolescents Exchange. Youth & Society 49, 3: 369 – 
392. https://doi.org/10.1177/0044118X15604849 
[27] Pamela K. Kohler, Lisa E. Manhart , and William E. 
Lafferty. 2008. Abstinence -Only and Comprehensive 
Sex Education and the Initiation of Sexual Activity 
and Teen Pregnancy. Journal of Adolescent Health 
42, 4: 344 –351. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2007.08.026 
[28] Panagiota Korenis and Stephen Bates Billick. 2014. 
Forensic Implications: Adolescent Sexting and 
Cyberbullying. Psychiatric Quarterly 85, 1: 97 –101. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11126 -013-9277 -z 
[29] Amanda Lenhart. 2015. Teens, Social Media & 
Technology Overview 2015. Pew Rese arch Center: 
Internet, Science & Tech . Retrieved May 25, 2017 
from http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/09/teens -
social -media -technology -2015/ 
[30] Amanda Lenhart, Monica Anderson, and Aaron 
Smith. 2015. Teens, Technology and Romantic 
Relationships | Pew Res earch Center. Retrieved November 29, 2018 from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/10/01/teens -
technology -and-romantic -relationships/ 
[31] Xiao Ma, Jeff Hancock, and Mor Naaman. 2016. 
Anonymity, Intimacy and Self -Disclosure in Social 
Media. In Proceedings of t he 2016 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems -CHI ’16, 
3857 –3869. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858414 
[32] A. E. Marwick and d. boyd. 2014. Networked 
privacy: How teenagers negotiate context in social 
media. New Media & Society 16, 7: 1051 –1067. 
[33] Tara Matthews, Kathleen O’Leary, Anna Turner, 
Manya Sleeper, Jill Woelfer, Martin Shelton, Cori 
Manthorne, Elizabeth Churchill, and Sunny 
Consolvo. 2017. Stories from Survivors: Privacy & 
Security Practices when Coping with Intimate Partner 
Abuse. 2189 –2201. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025875 
[34] Bridget Christine McHugh, Pamela Wisniewski, 
Mary Beth Rosson, and John M. Carroll. 2018. When 
social media traumatizes teens: The roles of online 
risk exposure, coping, and post -traumatic str ess. 
Internet Research 28, 5: 1169 –1188. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/IntR -02-2017 -0077 
[35] K. J. Mitchell, D. Finkelhor, and J. Wolak. 2001. 
Risk factors for and impact of online sexual 
solicitation of youth. JAMA 285, 23: 3011 –3014. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/j ama.285.23.3011 
[36] Kimberly J. Mitchell, David Finkelhor, and Janis 
Wolak. 2007. Online Requests for Sexual Pictures 
from Youth: Risk Factors and Incident 
Characteristics. Journal of Adolescent Health 41, 2: 
196–203. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth. 2007.03.013 
[37] Kimberly Mitchell, Lisa Jones, David Finkelhor, and 
Janis Wolak. 2014. Trends in Unwanted Online 
Experiences and Sexting : Final Report. Crimes 
Against Children Research Center . Retrieved from 
http://scholars.unh.edu/ccrc/49 
[38] J. A. Nas lund, K. A. Aschbrenner, L. A. Marsch, and 
S. J. Bartels. 2016. The future of mental health care: 
peer-to-peer support and social media. Epidemiology 
and Psychiatric Sciences 25, 2: 113 –122. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2045796015001067 
[39] Anthony T. Pinter, Pamela J. Wisniewski, Heng Xu, 
Mary Beth Rosson, and Jack M. Caroll. 2017. 
Adolescent Online Safety: Moving Beyond 
Formative Evaluations to Designing Solutions for the 
Future. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on 
Interaction Design and Children (IDC ’17), 352 –357. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3078072.3079722CHI 2020 Paper
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
Paper 273
Page 13[40] Jessica Ringrose, Laura Harvey, Rosalind Gill, and 
Sonia Livingstone. 2013. Teen girls, sexual double 
standards and ‘sexting’: Gendered value in digital 
image exchange. Feminist Theory 14, 3: 305 –323. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1464700113499853 
[41] Bradford W. Scharlott and William G. Christ. 1995. 
Overcoming relationship -initiation barriers: The 
impact of a computer -dating system on sex role, 
shyness, and appearance inhibitions. Computers in 
Human Be havior 11, 2: 191 –204. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0747 -5632(94)00028 -G 
[42] Halina Sklenarova, Anja Schulz, Petya Schuhmann, 
Michael Osterheider, and Janina Neutze. 2018. 
Online sexual solicitation by adults and peers – 
Results from a population based German sample. 
Child Abuse & Neglect 76: 225 –236. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2017.11.005 
[43] Stephanie. 2014. Cohen’s Kappa Statistic. Statistics 
How To . Retrieved June 27, 2019 from 
https://www.statisticshowto.datasciencecentral.com/c 
ohens -kappa -statistic / 
[44] Lalita K. Suzuki and Jerel P. Calzo. 2004. The search 
for peer advice in cyberspace: An examination of 
online teen bulletin boards about health and 
sexuality. Journal of Applied Developmental 
Psychology 25, 6: 685 –698. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appd ev.2004.09.002 
[45] Muhammad Uzair Tariq, Afsaneh Razi, Karla 
Badillo -Urquiola, and Pamela Wisniewski. 2019. A 
Review of the Gaps and Opportunities of Nudity and 
Skin Detection Algorithmic Research for the Purpose 
of Combating Adolescent Sexting Behaviors. In 
Human -Computer Interaction. Design Practice in 
Contemporary Societies (Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science), 90 –108. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030-
22636 -7_6 
[46] The Bark Team. Teen Text Speak Codes Every 
Parent Should Know. Bark . Retrieved June 26, 2019 
from https://www.bark.us/blog/teen -text-speak -
codes -every -parent -should -know/ 
[47] Deborah L. Tolman and Sara I. McClelland. 2011. 
Normative Sexuality Development in Adolescence: A 
Decade in Review, 2000 –2009. Journal of Research 
on Adolescence 21, 1: 242–255. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532 -7795.2010.00726.x 
[48] Joris Van Ouytsel, Ellen Van Gool, Koen Ponnet, and 
Michel Walrave. 2014. Brief report: The association 
between adolescents’ characteristics and engagement 
in sexting. Journal of Adolescence 37, 8: 1387 –1391. 
[49] Ashley Marie Walker, Yaxing Yao, Christine Geeng, 
Roberto Hoyle, and Pamela Wisniewski. 2019. 
Moving beyond “one size fits all”: research 
considerations for working with vulnerable populations. Interactions 26, 6: 34 –39. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3358904 
[50] Marianne Webb, Jane Burns, and Philippa Collin. 
2008. Providing online support for young people with 
mental health difficulties: challenges and 
opportunities explored. Early Intervention in 
Psychiatry 2, 2: 108 –113. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751 -7893.20 08.00066.x 
[51] Emily C Weinstein and Robert L Selman. 2016. 
Digital stress: Adolescents’ personal accounts. New 
Media & Society 18, 3: 391 –409. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444814543989 
[52] Marsha White and Steve M. Dorman. 2001. 
Receiving social support online: implications for 
health education. Health Education Research 16, 6: 
693–707. https://doi.org/10.1093/her/16.6.693 
[53] Pamela Wisniewski, Arup Kumar Ghosh, Mary Beth 
Rosson, Heng Xu, and John M. Carroll. 2017. 
Parental Control vs. Teen Self -Regulat ion: Is there a 
middle ground for mobile online safety? In 
Proceedings of the 20th ACM Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing . 
[54] Donghee Yvette Wohn. 2019. Volunteer Moderators 
in Twitch Micro Communities: How They Get 
Involved, the Roles They Play, and the Emotional 
Labor They Experience. In Proceedings of the 2019 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems -CHI ’19, 1–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300390 
[55] 2017. 105 Leading Social Networks Worldwide. 
Practical Ecommerce . Retrieved September 11, 2019 
from https://www.practicalecommerce.com/105 -
leading -social -networks -worldwide 
[56] NSF Award Search: Award#1928627 -FW-HTF -
RM: Collaborative Research: Augmenting Social 
Media Content Moderation. Retrieved September 19, 
2019 from 
https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD 
_ID=1928627&HistoricalAwards=false 
[57] NSF Award Search: Award#1827700 -PFI-RP: A 
Multi -Disciplinary Approach to Detecting 
Adolescent Online Risks. Retrieved December 21, 
2018 from 
https://nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1 
827700&HistoricalAwards=false 
[58] NSF Award Search: Award#1764089 -CHS: 
Medium: Scaling Qualitative Inductive Analysis 
through Computational Methods. Retrieved 
September 19, 2019 from 
https:// www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD 
_ID=1764089&HistoricalAwards=false