Dismantling the Master’s House  
Effective Allyship, Advocacy, and Activism for Women in Computing  
Nicki Washington, Ph.D. 
(Moderator)  
Duke University  
 Durham, NC USA  
 nicki@cs.duke.edu  Fay Cobb Payton, Ph.D.  
North Carolina  State University  
Raleigh, NC USA  
fcpayton@ncsu.ed u Frieda McAlear  
Kapor Center  
Oakland, CA USA  
friedam@kaporcenter.org  
Gail Chapman  
Exploring Computer Science  
San Diego, CA  
 chapgail@gmail.com  Lien Diaz 
 Constellations Center for Equity in Computing   
Atlanta, GA USA  
ldiaz@cc.gatech.edu  
ABSTRACT  
It is often assumed that women in CS fully understand and 
appreciate diversity, equity, and inclusion and advocate for the 
needs of all women. However, there exist highly publicized 
examples in computing and beyond where the intersection of 
race and gender (and the experiences of Black, Latina, and 
Indigenous women) were ignored by White women. This panel 
convenes diverse women in CS to discuss the importance and 
challenges of same -gender allyship, advocacy, and activism. 
CCS CONCEPTS  
• Social and professional topics~Race and ethnicity  • Social and 
professional  topics~Gender  • Social and professional 
topics~Cultural characteristics  
KEYWORDS  
Computing, women, allyship, advocacy, activism, diversity, 
inclusion 
ACM Reference Format:  
Nicki Washington , Fay Cobb Payton, Frieda McAlear,  Gail Chapman, and 
Lien Diaz . 2021. Dismantling the Master’s House : Effective Allyship, 
Advocacy, and Activism for Women in Computing . In Proceedings of the 
52nd ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education  (SIGSCE 
’21), March 13 -20, 2021, Virtual Event . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2 pages.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3408877.3432564  1 Summary 
Male-dominated computing environments present challenges 
that impact not only the persistence of women in the major, but 
also their hiring, retention, promotion, and professional growth 
[6]. These challenges are exacerbated for women from 
systemically marginalized groups (i.e., Black, Latina, and 
Indigenous), as the intersection of both race and gender results 
in not only lower representation, but also increased issues of 
marginalization, bias, and discrimination [4][6]. While women 
represent approximately 26% of the computing workforce and 
19% of all bachelors degrees awarded [3], Black, Latina, and 
Indigenous women comprise only 4.6%, 6.9%, and 0.01% of all 
bachelors degrees awarded to women and 0.008%, 1.1%, and 
0.003% of all bachelors degrees, respectively [1]. 
Improved diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) in computing 
requires improved allyship, advocacy, and activism from those in 
majority demographics. While many DEI efforts claim to target 
“women and racial/ethnic minorities ,” this classification not only 
implies that these demographics are mutually exclusive, but also 
that women in computing are monolithic (thus ignoring the 
experiences of women from systemically marginalized groups, 
for whom race and gender play pivotal roles) [4]. 
It is often assumed that women in computing understand and 
appreciate the diversity among each other and appropriately 
advocate for all. However, there exist highly publicized examples 
of women (specifically, White women) failing to account for the 
impact of intersectionality [5]. 
Audre Lorde highlighted that “Refusing to recognize 
difference makes it impossible to see the different problems and 
pitfalls facing us as women” [2]. While her work spoke to the 
feminist movement’s neglect of women from systemically 
marginalized groups, the same can be applied to computing. 
There is no one-size-fits-all approach to DEI. The experiences of 
women in computing vary based on their intersecting identities 
(e.g., race, ethnicity, sexuality, and ability). Failure to recognize 
all perspectives and issues facing diverse women continues to 
exacerbate the issues of marginalization, inclusion, and sense of  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and  that copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third -party components of this 
work must be honored. For all other u ses, contact the Owner/Author.  
SIGCSE '21 , March 13 –20, 2021, Virtual Event, USA  
© 2021 Copyright is  held by the owner/author(s).  
ACM ISBN 978 -1-4503-8062 -1/21/03.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3408877. 3432564  
Panel: Dismantling the Master's House: Effective Allyship, 
Advocacy, and Activism for Women in Computing
 
SIGCSE ’21, March 13–20, 2021, Virtual Event, USA 
604belonging, especially for those from systemically marginalized 
groups. 
This panel convenes women from various races , ethnicities, 
and computing careers to discuss the challenges in computing 
and why same-gender allyship, advocacy, and activism must first 
be properly demonstrated to address the greater DEI challenges 
in computing. Given the events of 2020 such as 
#BlackInTheIvory and #ShutdownSTEM, it is extremely relevant 
and important across all audiences, including students, faculty, 
and industry professionals. In addition, the panelists represent a 
broad range of careers within computing, including academic, 
government and research agencies, and nonprofit organizations .  
The goals of this panel are to: a) differentiate between 
allyship, advocacy, and activism; b) discuss how race and gender 
impact the experiences of women from systemically 
marginalized groups; c) identify current issues impacting the 
support of women in computing; d) discuss the challenges of 
intersectionality; e) identify strategies for becoming better 
advocates and activists for systemically marginalized women in 
computing. 
Note that this panel centers race and ethnicity , as 
representation of Black, Latina, and Indigenous women is 
significantly lower (11.6%), in comparison to White and Asian 
women (66.6%) [1]. 
2 Panelist Abstracts 
Fay Cobb Payton  (North Carolina State University, USA)  
has extensive research experience in  health disparities, STEM 
barriers, and the intersection of race, gender, and social class. 
She provides a unique perspective as a Black woman and full 
professor in academia, including hiring, promotion, and tenure  
challenges .  
 
Gail Chapman  (Exploring Computer Science, USA) brings a 
wealth of experience in equity in computing, especially training 
K-12 educators to better engage and teach computing to 
systemically marginalized K-12 students. Her perspective as a White woman includes not only a firsthand account of the 
feminist movement and allyship in this country and computing , 
but also why women in the majority race must “see” 
intersectionality and leverage their privilege to move past 
allyship and become better advocates and activists. 
 
Frieda McAlear  (Kapor Center, USA) blends her skills as a 
computer scientist and social science researcher to work with 
and for marginalized and minoritized  communities. As a Native 
Alaskan  woman, she notes that “resilience is a big part of my 
cultural identity.” She bri ngs a valuable and unique 
contribution to the panel that discusses the impact of DEI 
from the least represented race in computing.  
 
Lien Diaz  (Constellations Center for Equity in Computing, USA) 
professional experience includes “challenging the status quo 
to change perspectives of CS education and making 
transparent the educational issues that must be addressed to 
obtain equity in school systems across the country.” She 
also brings a unique personal experience as a Vietnamese 
and Mexican woman who has experienced various biases in 
her academic and professional careers that not only 
impacted her trajectory, but also formed the basis for much 
of her career focus.  
REFERENCES  
[1] 2019 Taulbee Survey. Retrieved from https://tinyurl.com/ycvvt4xl . 
[2] Lorde, A. (1984). “Age, Race, Class and Sex: Women Redefining Difference.” 
Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches.  
[3]  National Science Board (2018). Science and Engineering Indicators 2018. 
[4]  Ross, M., Hazari, Z., Sonnert, G., and Sadler, P. (2020). “The Intersection of 
Being Black and Being a Woman: Examining the Effect of Social Computing 
Relationships on Computer Science Career Choice.” ACM Transactions on 
Computing Education , 20(2). https://doi.org/10.1145/3377426   
[5]  Sandberg, S. (2013). Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead . 
[6]  Washington, A.N. (2020). “When Twice As Good Isn’t Enough: The Case for 
Cultural Competence in Computing.” SIGCSE '20: Proceedings  of the 51st ACM 
Technical  Symposium on Computer Science Education.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3328778.3366792  
 
Panel: Dismantling the Master's House: Effective Allyship, 
Advocacy, and Activism for Women in Computing
 
SIGCSE ’21, March 13–20, 2021, Virtual Event, USA 
605