Interactive Video Search
Klaus Schoeffmann
Klagenfurt University
Universitätsstr. 65-67,
A-9020 Klagenfurt, Austria
ks@itec.aau.atFrank Hopfgartner
University of Glasgow
11 University Gardens, Glasgow G12
8QH, UK
frank.hopfgartner@glasgow.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
With an increasing amount of video data in our daily life,
the need for content-based search in videos increases as well.
Though a lot of research has been spent on video retrieval
tools and methods which allow for automatic search in videos
through content-based queries, still the performance of auto-
matic video retrieval is far from optimal. In this tutorial we
discussed (i) proposed solutions for improved video content
navigation, (ii) typical interaction of content-based query-
ing features, and (iii) advanced video content visualization
methods. Moreover, we discussed interactive video search
systems and ways to evaluate their performance.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4 [Information Systems Applications ]: Miscellaneous
General Terms
Experimentation
Keywords
Interactive Video Retrieval; Search; Tutorial
1. INTRODUCTION
Over the last two decades, there has been a lot of re-
search on content-based video retrieval to solve the task of
nding the proper scene of interest in a large video archive.
However, there are still well-known limitations with video
retrieval applications. First, there is the usability gap . A
user is often not able to express his/her needs and thoughts
through text, a challenge that is already apparent for an
image (\ An image is worth a thousand words. ") but much
worse for a video segment consisting of many images. Ad-
ditionally, the issue of polysemy is a challenging problem
in text-based search, which can only be partially solved
through relevance feedback. Similarly, an automatic re-
trieval tool cannot easily determine the user-dependent rel-
ative importance (i.e., weight) of a query term and hence
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
MM’15, October 26–30, 2015, Brisbane, Australia
ACM 978-1-4503-3459-4/15/10.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2733373.2807417.often returns too many irrelevant results. Finally, there is
another challenging problem that aects the content-based
indexing phase, namely the semantic gap , which is the dis-
crepancy between the semantics a user can derive from an
image and the information a computer can extract from pixel
values [15]. The semantic gap seriously limits the achievable
performance of visual information retrieval tools.
There is consensus in the multimedia community that
content-based retrieval approaches should have a stronger
focus on the human behind the retrieval application [4, 16].
Instead of making small improvements in the eld of content-
based indexing and retrieval, video search tools should aim
at more intense integration of the user into the search pro-
cess, focusing on interactive video search [2, 3, 7, 8] rather
than automatic querying. Interactive video search follows
this idea of intense user integration with advanced content
interaction and provides a powerful alternative to the com-
mon video retrieval approach [12]. It is known as the process
of interactive video content exploration with the help of con-
tent navigation [9], summarization [1], on-demand querying
[14], and browsing of querying results or ltered content [5].
In contrast to typical video retrieval, such interactive video
search tools give more control to the user and provide exi-
ble search and browsing features instead of focusing on the
query-and-browse-results approach. Hence, even if the per-
formance of content analysis is not optimal, there is a chance
that a smart user could compensate shortcomings through
clever use of available features.
Interactive video search tools support directed andundi-
rected search scenarios. In the rst scenario, users have a
clear information need and want to nd a specic target
segment in the video (e.g., the weather forecast in a news
show); such a search is also known as known-item search or
target search . In the second scenario, users have no concrete
search goal but want to explore the content in order to learn
or nd something interesting (e.g., a violent scene in surveil-
lance videos); such a search scenario is known as exploratory
search . Users need exploratory search when they cannot suf-
ciently describe the desired content, e.g., through a query
in a video retrieval tool, or when they just want to browse
instead of search (i.e., without a concrete desired scene).
Over the years many tools for interactive video search (of-
ten known as video browsing or video exploration tools) have
been proposed in the literature (see [12, 13] for a survey),
and it has been shown that these tools can eectively help
users nd desired content in videos (e.g., [1, 14]). Some of
these tools combine sophisticated content analysis methods
controlled by the user for their personal needs [10]. Some
1321others provide rather simple content navigation features but
give the users more interactivity to allow them to eectively
take advantage of their knowledge about the content and the
content structure [11]. Interestingly, it has been shown that
tools of the latter kind can even outperform tools of the rst
kind for some search tasks [10].
2. LEARNING OBJECTIVE
This tutorial gave a broad overview of solutions in two
areas: (1) video retrieval, and (2) interactive video search.
We discussed state-of-the-art approaches, but also the cur-
rent shortcomings and outlined important research tasks for
the future of multimedia search and retrieval. Our discus-
sion also covered tools and methods that originate from
the Human-Computer-Interaction (HCI) community, which
many people in the multimedia community might not be
aware of yet. The tutorial provided the basis to elevate re-
search on video retrieval to the next level.
Target audience were researchers and practitioners in the
eld of multimedia analysis and information access. The
participants learned best practice on how to interact with
multimedia content and should be able to apply this knowl-
edge in their own project upon completion of the tutorial.
Following an introduction of the subject matter, we high-
lighted the need for interactive video search and outlined
well-known issues and current research areas. Then, we pre-
sented dierent graphical user interfaces that are designed to
address these challenges. We started by presenting commer-
cial and academic video search systems that represent the
state-of-the-art in video search. In order to illustrate the
limitations of video search, we began with an introduction
to video content analysis. In particular, we focused on the
segmentation of videos into dierent units of retrieval (i.e.,
video shots and semantically coherent scenes), argued for
the selection of appropriate keyframes and explained how to
index these video materials. Then, we overviewed methods
for video content presentation, namely abstraction, summa-
rization, and visualization of video content. After that, we
introduced dierent methods to interact with video content.
We showcased the advantages of browsing and exploration
of video content, methods to navigate through the content,
querying and sketching interfaces. Following this session,
the participants learned how to evaluate the performance of
video search engines. We introduced the de-facto standard
evaluation protocol that is applied for scientic performance
evaluation. Furthermore, we introduced popular Academic
evaluation campaigns, namely the Known-Item search task
promoted by TRECVid and the Video Browser Showdown.
As an outlook in upcoming research challenges, we intro-
duced a special case of multimedia search, namely access to
visual lifelogs [6]. With the ever increasing amount of wear-
able devices that are released nowadays, people have the
opportunity to capture vast amount of heterogeneous data
(e.g., images, sensor readings, videos) that depict aspects
of their personal lives. In the last part of the tutorial, we
introduced approaches to access and display these \lifelogs".
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Austrian Federal Ministry
for Transport, Innovation and Technology (bmvit), Austrian
Science Fund (FWF): TRP 273-N15, and the ERDF.3. REFERENCES
[1] B. Adams, S. Greenhill, and S. Venkatesh. Towards a
video browser for the digital native. In ICMEW'12 ,
pages 127{132, July 2012.
[2] M. Christel, C. Huang, N. Moraveji, and
N. Papernick. Exploiting multiple modalities for
interactive video retrieval. In ICASSP'04 , volume 3,
pages iii{1032, May 2004.
[3] M. G. Christel and R. Yan. Merging storyboard
strategies and automatic retrieval for improving
interactive video search. In CIVR'07 , pages 486{493,
New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
[4] R. Datta, D. Joshi, J. Li, and J. Z. Wang. Image
retrieval: Ideas, inuences, and trends of the new age.
ACM Computing Surveys , 40(2):5:1{5:60, May 2008.
[5] A. Girgensohn, F. Shipman, and L. Wilcox. Adaptive
clustering and interactive visualizations to support the
selection of video clips. In ICMR '11 , pages 34:1{34:8,
New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[6] C. Gurrin, A. F. Smeaton, and A. R. Doherty.
Lifelogging: Personal big data. Foundations and
Trends in Information Retrieval , 8(1):1{125, 2014.
[7] F. Hopfgartner. Understanding Video Retrieval . VDM
Verlag, 2007.
[8] F. Hopfgartner, J. Urban, R. Villa, and J. M. Jose.
Simulated testing of an adaptive multimedia
information retrieval system. In CBMI'07 , pages
328{335, 2007.
[9] J. Huber, J. Steimle, and M. M uhlhauser. Toward
more ecient user interfaces for mobile video
browsing: An in-depth exploration of the design space.
InMM'10 , pages 341{350, New York, NY, USA, 2010.
[10] K. Schoemann, D. Ahlstr om, W. Bailer,
C. Cob^ arzan, F. Hopfgartner, K. McGuinness,
C. Gurrin, C. Frisson, D.-D. Le, M. Del Fabro, H. Bai,
and W. Weiss. The video browser showdown: a live
evaluation of interactive video search tools. IJMIR ,
3(2):113{127, 2014.
[11] K. Schoemann and L. Boeszoermenyi. Video
browsing using interactive navigation summaries. In
CBMI'09 , pages 243{248, Chania, Crete, June 2009.
[12] K. Schoemann, F. Hopfgartner, O. Marques,
L. Boeszoermenyi, and J. M. Jose. Video browsing
interfaces and applications: a review. SPIE Reviews,
1(1):1{35(018004), 2010.
[13] K. Schoemann, J. Huber, and M. A. Hudelist. Video
interaction tools: A survey of recent work. ACM
Computing Surveys , pages 1{36, 2015. Accepted for
publication.
[14] K. Schoemann, M. Taschwer, and L. Boeszoermenyi.
The video explorer: A tool for navigation and
searching within a single video based on fast content
analysis. In MMSys'10 , pages 247{258. ACM, 2010.
[15] A. W. M. Smeulders, M. Worring, S. Santini,
A. Gupta, and R. Jain. Content-based image retrieval
at the end of the early years. TPAMI ,
22(12):1349{1380, Dec 2000.
[16] M. Worring, P. Sajda, S. Santini, D. A. Shamma,
A. F. Smeaton, and Q. Yang. Where is the user in
multimedia retrieval? IEEE MultiMedia , 19(4):6{10,
2012.
1322