136 August 1997/Vol. 40, No. 8 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACMAself-constituted group of cryptographers and com-
puter scientists—Hal Abelson (MIT/Hewlett-Packard), Ross Anderson (Cambridge University),
Steven M. Bellovin (AT&T Research), Josh Benaloh(Microsoft), Matt Blaze (AT&T Research), WhitfieldDiffie (Sun Microsystems), John Gilmore (ElectronicFrontier Foundation), Ronald L. Rivest (MIT), Jeffery I.Schiller (MIT), Bruce Schneier (Counterpane Systems),and I—issued a report “The Risks of Key Recovery, KeyEscrow, and Trusted Third-Party Encryption” May 27,1997 (see http://www.crypto.com) covering the relatedtechnical implications, risks, and costs. Significant poten-tial risks and costs should always be considered beforedeploying key-management schemes. As a coauthor andlong-time riskologist, I believe the report deserves widerdiscussion. So, here are its executive summary and a briefdiscussion of its implications.
“A variety of ‘key recovery,’ ‘key escrow,’ and ‘trusted
third-party’ encryption requirements have been suggestedin recent years by government agencies seeking to con-duct covert surveillance within the changing environ-ments brought about by new technologies. This reportexamines the fundamental properties of these require-ments and attempts to outline the technical risks, costs,and implications of widely deploying systems that pro-vide government access to encryption keys.
“The deployment of key-recovery-based encryption
infrastructures to meet law enforcement’s stated specifica-tions will result in substantial sacrifices in security andgreatly increased costs to the end user.
“Building the secure computer-communication infra-
structures necessary to provide adequate technologicalunderpinnings demanded by these requirements would beenormously complex and is far beyond the experience andcurrent competency of the field. Even if such infrastruc-tures could be built, the risks and costs of such an operat-ing environment may ultimately prove unacceptable. Inaddition, these infrastructures would generally requireextraordinary levels of human trustworthiness.
“These difficulties are a function of the basic govern-
ment access requirements proposed for key-recoveryencryption systems. They exist regardless of the design ofthe recovery systems—whether the systems use private-key cryptography or public-key cryptography; whetherthe databases are split with secret-sharing techniques ormaintained in a single hardened secure facility; whetherthe recovery services provide private keys, session keys, or
merely decrypt specific data as needed; and whether thereis a single centralized infrastructure, many decentralizedinfrastructures, or a collection of different approaches.
“All key-recovery systems require the existence of a
highly sensitive and highly available secret key or collec-tion of keys that must be maintained in a secure mannerover an extended time period. These systems must makedecryption information quickly accessible to law-enforce-ment agencies without notice to the key owners. Thesebasic requirements make the problem of general key recov-ery difficult and expensive—and potentially too unsecureand too costly for many applications and many users.
“Attempts to force the widespread adoption of key-
recovery encryption through export controls, import ordomestic use regulations, or international standards shouldbe considered in light of these factors. The public mustcarefully consider the costs and benefits of embracing gov-ernment-access key recovery before imposing the newsecurity risks and spending the huge investment required(potentially many billions of dollars, in direct and indirectcosts) to deploy a global key-recovery infrastructure.”
Cryptography is not a panacea for attaining security
and privacy, just one technique among many. The crypto-graphic and system-security communities must workharder to overcome some of the deficiencies in the com-puter-communication infrastructure—hopefully withgreater encouragement from the U.S. law-enforcementcommunity (which currently focuses on prosecution, notprevention of computer misuse). But trapdoor access isnot a panacea for law enforcement or fighting terrorism,providing at best peepholes into certain kinds of informa-tion. Such access would provide substantial administrativeproblems for law enforcement and everyone else.
The need to address security as a systemic problem is a
familiar thread in this column. The risks lie not only inthe cryptographic algorithms and key lengths but in howcryptography is encapsulated. We must face such issueswith key escrow, key recovery, and the third parties them-selves. Similar problems arise for those seeking to increasesystem and network security and for those believing theinherent risks are controllable. Because the infrastructureis weak, vulnerabilities are inevitable.  
Peter G. Neumann moderates RISKS Forum 
(risks-request@-csl.sri.com).cCrypto Key ManagementPAUL WATSONPeter G. Neumann
Inside