10Exploration of Intersectionality and ComputerScience
Demographics: Understanding theHistorical Context
of Shifts in Participation
STEPHANIE LUNN, LEILA ZAHEDI, and MONIQUE ROSS, FloridaInternationalUniversity
MATTHEW OHLAND, PurdueUniversity
Althoughcomputingoccupationshavesomeofthegreatestprojectedgrowthrates,thereremainsadeficitof
graduatesinthesefields.Thestruggletoengageenoughstudentstomeetdemandsisparticularlypronounced
for groups already underrepresented in computing, specifically, individuals that self-identify as a woman,
or as Black, Hispanic/Latinx, or Native American. Prior studies have begun to examine issues surrounding
engagementandretention,butmoreunderstandingisneededtoclosethegap,andtobroadenparticipation.
In this research, we provide quantitative evidence from the Multiple-Institution Database for Investigating
EngineeringLongitudinalDevelopment—alongitudinal,multi-institutionaldatabasetodescribeparticipation
trends of marginalized groups in computer science. Using descriptive statistics, we present the enrollment
and graduation rates for those situated at the intersection of race/ethnicity and gender between 1987 and
2018. In this work, we observed periods of significant flux for Black men and women, and White women in
particular,andconsistentlylowparticipationofHispanic/LatinxandNativeAmericanmenandwomen,and
Asian women. To provide framing for the evident peaks and valleys in participation, we applied historical
context analysis to describe the political, economic, and social factors and events that may have impacted
each group. These results put a spotlight on populations largely overlooked in statistical work and have
the potential to inform educators, administrators, and researchers about how enrollments and graduation
rateshavechangedovertimeincomputingfields.Inaddition,theyofferinsightintopotentialcausesforthe
vicissitudes,toencourage moreequal access for allstudents goingforward.
CCSConcepts:• Social and professional topics →Race and ethnicity ;Women;History of computing ;
Computing education ;
Additional KeyWords and Phrases:Women in computing, intersectionality, computing demographics, com-
putinghistory,historicalcontext analysis,race, ethnicity, gender, diversity
ACM Reference format:
Stephanie Lunn, Leila Zahedi, Monique Ross, and Matthew Ohland. 2021. Exploration of Intersectionality
and Computer Science Demographics: Understanding the Historical Context of Shifts in Participation. ACM
Trans.Comput.Educ. 21, 2, Article10 (March 2021), 30 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3445985
Authors’addresses:S.Lunn,L.Zahedi,andM.Ross,FloridaInternationalUniversity,11200SW8thStreet,Miami,Florida,
33199; emails: {slunn002, lzahe001, moross}@fiu.edu; M. Ohland, Purdue University, 610 Purdue Mall, West Lafayette, In-
diana,47907;email:ohland@purdue.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee.Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
© 2021Association forComputingMachinery.
1946-6226/2021/03-ART10$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3445985
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:2 S. Lunn et al.
1 INTRODUCTION
One major problem facing the computing workforce is the challenge to keep pace with the de-
mand for skilled professionals. Between 2019 and 2029, computer and information technology
occupations are projected to rise 11%, which is a rate faster than the average for other fields [ 71].
However, research indicates that the current quantity of graduates will not be able to meet the
growing needs of the computing industry [ 16,82]. Furthermore, there is a profound difference in
theenrollmentandsubsequentpersistenceofstudentsintechnologyfieldswhendataisdisaggre-
gatedacrossrace,ethnicity,andgender[ 4].Predominantly,WhiteandAsianmenhavethehighest
levelsofcomputingstickiness(ameasureofstudents’persistencecomparingenrollmentsrelative
to graduation rates) [ 112]. Studies, such as these, suggest that as a discipline we will continue to
lagbehinddemand,particularlyintermsofequalrepresentation.Thiscreatesanurgencytolearn
moreaboutthosepopulationswhoseenrollments,graduationrates,andstickinesscontinuetobe
low.
In computing, there is a known underrepresentation of women, Black, Hispanic/Latinx, and
Native American students and workers [ 14,89,95,112]. Moreover, numbers are particularly low
for women of color. This underrepresentation has resulted in a movement to disaggregate data
to highlight their lack of presence in the field, and explicitly explore intersectional experiences
in computing to give them a voice and a presence in the conversation around their participation
[21,86,104]. Although there has been a shift in literature around this “call to action,” there is
still an incomplete view of their historical participation. Entities like the Computing Research
Association(CRA)publishTaulbeereports;however,adisaggregationofdataisonlyavailablefrom
2013onward[ 4].Asapointofclarification,despiteshiftsinterminologyovertime,wewillbeusing
the terms “Black,” “Native American,” “Hispanic/Latinx,” and “Asian” to refer to the populations
discussed in this article, in alignment with the designations applied in the Multiple-Institution
DatabaseforInvestigatingEngineeringLongitudinal Development(MIDFIELD)dataset[ 61].
In this work, we consider enrollment and graduation rates in computing fields, and examine
trends between 1987 and 2018. Additionally, we consider the intersectionality of social identities
when disaggregating the data, since prior work has demonstrated the importance of considering
thosesituatedattheintersectionofrace/ethnicityandgenderwheninvestigatingpersistence[ 86].
We use Multiple-Institution Database for Investigating Engineering Longitudinal Development
(MIDFIELD) to gather descriptive statistics of participation in computing fields, and to provide a
cross-sectional look at enrollment and graduation rates of women, and especially, Black women,
Hispanic/Latinx women, Native American women, and Asian women. In addition, we conduct
historical context analysis to provide framing for the time periods identified in the quantitative
studyashavingnotableshiftsinparticipation.Tothisend,weconsidera notable shift asfollows:
Achangeintheenrollmentorgraduationratesofaspecificintersectionalgroupfrom
relatively stable value over the span of several years to one that is comparatively
higherorlowerthefollowingyear(s).Thepreciseamountoffluctuationisdetermined
bytheproportionalrepresentationwithinthegroupofstudyascomparedtotheover-
allpopulation.
In the work described, our overall population is defined as all computing students across the in-
stitutionsreportedin MIDFIELD.Thespecificresearchquestionsguiding thisstudyare:
(1) How have White, Black, Hispanic/Latinx, Native American, and Asian women’s partici-
pationin computingshiftedovertime?
(2) What major historical events and activities describe the context of the notable shifts ob-
servedinwomen’s participation?
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:3
We will begin by first reviewing the background work in Section 2. In Section 3, we describe
the dataset that we utilized, as well as what quantitative and qualitative methods we employed.
We provide the results of the quantitative analysis of MIDFIELD in Section 4, along with briefly
mentioningthequalitativeresults.Then,inSection 5,weprovideadiscussionofourfindingsand
the historical context analysis. Finally, we present the limitations to this work in Section 6,a n d
finishin Section 7withtheconclusionsand broaderimpactsof thesefindings.
2 RELATEDRESEARCH
Inthissection,wewillpresentanoverviewofexistingliteraturerelatedtotheparticipationofcom-
puting students, with additional consideration for work that focuses on Black, Hispanic/Latinx,
Native American, and Asian women. First, we introduce intersectionality, a concept that frames
our inquiry, in Section 2.1. Then, we follow up with research that considers the enrollment and
persistenceof computingstudentsin Section 2.2.
2.1 Intersectionality
Intersectionality refers to a theoretical framework for exploring the overlapping components
ofanindividual’sidentities—whetherpolitical(e.g.,politicalaffiliations),social(e.g.,race,gender,
disability),organizational(e.g.,jobtitle),orcircumstantial(e.g.,student,parent)[ 26].Intersection-
alityisacalltoscholarstonotignoreorundervaluethecomplexitiesassociatedwithexperiences
of those that stratify more than one axis of oppression, including race, gender, class, sexual ori-
entation, and so on [ 28,31]. This framework points out that women are not a monolith and, as
such,donotexperiencelifeormarginalitythesame[ 8,23,60].Previously,literaturehasdescribed
how women of color are shaped by existing within multiple spheres of minority categorization,
often facing bothracismand sexism, and theimportanceof consideringintersectionalidentity as
more than just the sum of individual labels [ 29]. Intersectionality presents the opportunity and
theargumentfordisaggregatingdataandevaluating,inthiscase,Blackwomen,Hispanicwomen,
NativeAmericanwomen,andAsianwomenandtheircomplexidentitiesratherthanlosethemin
overgeneralized,aggregateddata.Priorworkbyscholarsinterestedinthenuanceassociatedwith
callingattentionto,investigating,andunderstandingtheexperiencesofwomenattheintersection
of race and gender have provided the precedent for continuing this line of inquiry [ 60,75,83,86,
104,106,109].
In our study, we leveraged that prior work to focus on social identity, and deliberately apply
an intersectional lens in selecting, presenting, and interpreting the data. Drawing on the works
of Crenshaw, and others who have followed, we center these women as the focus of our work [ 2,
24,28,30,50,86].Whilethedatacollectionwasnotdesignedwithintersectionalityastheguiding
framework, the research team saw the opportunity to leverage this large dataset to explore the
representation trends. The use of a secondary data source (MIDFIELD) provided unique access to
largestudentenrollmentandgraduationnumbersandofferedanopportunitytoidentifypatterns
uniquetopopulationsin computing.
2.2 Enrollmentand Graduation Reportingin Computing
Publications from the United States (U.S.) Census Bureau report that the current population of
computing students and professionals is not reflective of the breakdown observed in the general
populationofthecountry.Forexample,morethan50%ofthepopulationarewomen[ 13];however,
the number of women receiving bachelor’s degrees in computer science in 2016 was only 18.7%
[65]. Antithetically, when considering student persistence, it is necessary to not only consider
how many students enroll but also to define retention within a program of study [ 95]. As such,
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:4 S. Lunn et al.
graduation rates can serve as a measure to depict the representation of different groups upon
completionof a program.
While other datasets have been created to examine trends in computing, typically they offer
limited longitudinal information [ 4,45]. In part, this is due to challenges in obtaining data from
multipleinstitutions,assomemayuseinconsistentformatting[ 95].Moreover,thoseorganizations
that do collect aggregated data rarely consider or report intersectionality, and instead statistics
are presented with separate counts for gender and race/ethnicity [ 4,45,89,113]. Although such
information is indeed beneficial for computer science education research, it neglects to consider
how individual groups experience computing, and the trends that may impact their participation
and retention.
The top publishers pertaining to enrollment and graduation information in computing are
the CRA, the National Science Foundation (NSF), and the Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM) [4,44,68,113]. However, the institutions that report, the sources of the data included by
each, and the population size for each are distinct [ 68]. As a result, a direct comparison between
allthreemay notbe valid,yet eachcanprovide usefulinsightintostudentparticipation.
CRA conducts a survey annually at institutions throughout the United States and Canada to
describechangesincomputingstudents’enrollment,graduation,andemploymentdatingbackto
1984[4].TheypublishthefindingsintheCRATaulbeeSurvey.Whiletheparticipationreportsare
quite comprehensive, and include demographic information on computer science and computer
engineering students; the findings publicly available only date back to 2001, and intersectional
information on undergraduates was not presented until 2013, where it is included in the 2012–
2013 report. Moreover, Taulbee focuses on institutions that offer PhDs in computing fields, and
theyexcludefor-profitinstitutions[ 4,68,114].Thistypeofreportinglimitstherepresentationof
certain institutions, and in particular may result in the exclusion of minority serving schools like
Historically BlackColleges and Universities(HBCUs)[ 68].
NSFisanindependentfederalagencyintheU.S.thatisresponsibleforfundingalargepercent-
ageofscience,technology,engineering,andmathematics(STEM)-relatedinitiativesandresearch
[42]. They also collect, analyze, and present data pertaining to STEM education, in conjunction
withtheNationalCenterforScienceandEngineeringStatistics(NCSES)[ 44].NCSESutilizesdata
fromtheIntegratedPostsecondaryEducationDataSystem(IPEDS)survey,anationalcensuscon-
ducted with institutions that receive federal funding. In 2015, the National Science Foundation
published a report on graduation rates for degrees in computer science between 1966 and 2012
[43]. While it presented information on the gender of degree recipients, it was aggregated, and
thus lacked the nuance of disaggregated data. As a follow up, NSF released another report in
2019, with NCSES, called the “Women, Minorities, and Persons with Disabilities in Science and
Engineering”[ 65].Thisreportfocusedontheperiodbetween2006and2016.Whileitdidinclude
statistics on women and underrepresented minorities, its focus was science and engineering, and
informationpublishedspecificallyoncomputingstudentswaslimited.MuchliketheoriginalNSF
report, it did not present disaggregated data. An even more recent NSF report released in 2020,
about science and engineering degrees, only presented data for all recipients, or by gender, with
separate tables for men and women [ 45]. Therefore, it still neglected gender in relation to race or
ethnicidentificationoftheparticipants.
TheAssociationforComputingMachinery–Non-doctoralGrantingDepartmentsinComputing
(ACM-NDC) also began presenting computing demographics in 2012-2013, as a complement to
Taulbee [ 81,113]. The ACM-NDC survey provides annual information about non-doctoral grant-
ingfour-yearinstitutionsincomputingfields,includingcomputerscience,computerengineering,
information systems, information technology, and software engineering [ 113]. While this survey
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:5
doesofferinformationaboutthenumberofgraduatesbygender,race,andethnicity,demographics
arenot reportedbyintersectionalgroup.
The limited body of work related to the enrollment and persistence of Black, Hispanic/Latinx,
Native American, and Asian women suggests a necessity to disaggregate the data as well as take
deliberate action to explore these populations in computing. Therefore, in this work, we attempt
toresolvepriorlimitationsbydescribingcomputingparticipationoveralargertimespan,andwe
do sowithconsiderationto intersectionality.
3M E T H O D S
In this section, we describe the two methods leveraged for this study—quantitative inquiry into
MIDFIELD and qualitative historical context analysis to provide understanding about the events
or factors that occurred in society that could have impacted computing participation. We will
begin by describing the MIDFIELD database, including the origin, contents, and its limitations
in Section 3.1. Then, we describe the method of analysis invoked for the quantitative inquiry in
Section3.2.Thisisfollowedbyapresentationofthequalitativehistoricalcontextanalysis,applied
todefine criticalmoments basedon notableshiftsobservedfor differentgroupsin Section 3.3.
3.1 Database
Limitations in cross-sectional data for engineering students motivated engineering education re-
searchers to create a longitudinal student database [ 18]. Through the examination of curricula
andstudentrecords,theysoughttocreatenationalbenchmarks.In1996,theSoutheasternUniver-
sity and College Coalition for Engineering Education (SUCCEED) Longitudinal Database (LDB)
wascreatedthroughtheEngineeringEducationCoalition(EEC)program[ 74],undertheNational
ScienceFoundation.MIDFIELDwasa resultof thiseffort[ 63].
MIDFIELD is a longitudinal database with student data from 19 different institutions and con-
sists of records for over 1.5 million undergraduates [ 74]. The records include demographic in-
formation (e.g., gender, ethnicity, and race) as well as, what we will refer to as, transcript data.
Transcript data allows MIDFIELD users to track academic information throughout the duration
of a student’s education including academic major, courses taken, grades, and graduation. MID-
FIELD began data collection in 1987 and continues to do so currently, adding new participating
institutions annually. Due to the size of this dataset, MIDFIELD has the potential of supporting
analyses of disaggregated data to provide valuable insights into populations often omitted due to
small numbers[ 61].
AlthoughMIDFIELDincludesstudentsmajoringinvariousdisciplines,wewereonlyinterested
incomputingstudents,andthusstratifiedusingtheClassificationofInstructionalPrograms(CIP)
codingsystembywhichCIP2wassetto11forcomputerandinformationsciences.Thisincluded
studentsincomputerscience(CS),computerprogramming(CP),informationtechnology(IT),and
information science (IS). After filtering the entire database on this CIP code, we established a
reduced dataset of approximately 43,000 students from 1987–2018. However, it should be noted
thatnotallschoolsreportedforallyears.Thecompletetimelineforwhenthe19differentschools
reportedisshownin Figure 1.
The reporting universities and colleges were geographically dispersed throughout the U.S. and
representedvaryingtypesofinstitutions(private,public,small,medium,andlarge),includingPre-
dominately White Institutions (PWIs), two HBCUs, and one Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI).
The two HBCUs stopped reporting after 2003 and 2004, which may explain one shift in demo-
graphicsafterthistimeframe(seeFigure 1).TherewerenoformalTribalCollegesandUniversities
(TCUs) or Asian American Native American Pacific Islander-Serving Institutions (AANAPISIs) in
thisdataset.
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:6 S. Lunn et al.
Fig. 1. Years in which schools reported data in MIDFIELD over time.
3.2 Quantitative Data Analysis
For quantitative data analysis, we used Python version 3.7.4, along with the Pandas and NumPy
libraries,tocalculatedescriptivestatisticsoftheintersectionalpopulationsinMIDFIELD.Thepur-
pose was to simply illustrate the rates of participation and graduation rates of each group over
time. As such, all demographics were calculated annually for both enrollment and graduation as
percentages of each group (e.g., Black women) across institutions, relative to the total population
ofstudentsincomputingthatyear.Thistypeofreporting,withdemographicscalculatedasaper-
cent of the total, is consistent with the work of others [ 10,59,60]. No averages were calculated.
While MIDFIELD includes information between 1987 and 2018, we limited the graduation anal-
ysis to a subset of 1987–2012, because we wanted to allow six years to ensure any students who
may have enrolled had the average time to graduation of six years. The chosen dates are con-
sistent with the six year window recommended by the National Center for Educational Statistics
[69].
3.3 HistoricalContext Analysis
To try to explain the stark peaks and valleys in the quantitative analysis, we applied historical
contextanalysis.Historicalcontextanalysisconsistsofacriticalexaminationofdocumentedpast
conditionstodescribethepolitical,cultural,economic,andsocialclimatethatdefinedcriticalperi-
odsofchange.AccordingtoGiven, contextisdefinedasthe“ externalcharacteristicsofthesituation
tobestudiedthataresituatedoutsidetheindividual,group,oreveninstitutionorcommunitythatare
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:7
thefocusofinterest ”[48,p.392].Givenarguesthatthismethodisuseful,sinceindividualbehavior
isinfluencedbythehistoricaleventsthatdefineaparticularplaceandtime.Consideringtherele-
vanceof broaderfactorsthatevolve and influencepopulations,we usehistoricalcontextanalysis
todescribeenrollmentandgraduationratefluctuationsincomputing.Therefore,wealsoconsider
historical events in terms of institutional funding, initiatives, organizations, or groups that could
impact academic decisions. Our application follows others that similarly use historical context to
provideframing of quantitativedata [ 6,47].
Thisworkdemonstrates,however,thatthereisnotalwaysadirectcorrelationbetweenthedate
of establishment, and a surge in computing enrollments or graduations. We combine the notable
shifts based on quantitative numbers for enrollments and graduations in the MIDFIELD dataset
withthemajorshiftsincultureandhistoryforwomen.Specifically,wefocusonwomenthatself-
identifywithvaryingracial/ethnicgroups,andexaminethehistoricaleffortsandeventsthatmay
havecontributedto theshiftsobservedaroundthoseperiods.
While we cannot make explicit connections between our numbers and precise events, we do
provide historical context for women, and particularly for women of color. Specific events have
hadanimpactonthecultureofcomputingandhaveledtomeaningfulmomentsthatcouldaffect
themotivationofstudents’enrollmentandgraduation.Inaddition,thecreationofsocieties,orga-
nizations, and groups that seek to broaden participation have served to raise awareness, create a
community,andtotrytomakecomputingmoreequitableforall.Buildingcommunitieshasbeen
shown to increase feelings of inclusion, to imbue students with a sense of belonging, and to aid
inretention[ 70,99,106].Senseofbelongingisacriticalsub-constructofcomputingidentity,and
is considered important for students’ persistence as well [ 99]. Also, having role models, mentors,
and advisors are suggested to further contribute to the establishment of a more positive comput-
ing identity [ 9,85]. Therefore, we do also consider organizations and initiatives heralded by the
ACM and NSF, that served to provide opportunities and develop a community for minoritized
populations.
In this work, we considered a “shift” to include an increase or decrease of an intersectional
population over the span of a single year, or several years. As such, the threshold applied varied
by group, but for example, Black women enrollments started at 6.6% of the population in 1987,
stayed within a 1% change at 7.7% of the population in 1988, and 7.4% in 1989. However, there
was a more than 3% change in the early 1990s as values rose to 10.3% in 1990, peaked at 14.3% of
the total population in 1991, and still remained at 10.60% in 1992, before levels declined back to
priorlevelsof7.7%in1993.Sincetherewasasustainedperiodofstableenrollment,wherestableis
consideredavariationoflessthan1%,wethereforeconsidertheperiodof1990–1992whenBlack
women were proportionally higher to be a notable historical period. However, for populations
such as Native American women, where enrollments never rose above 1% of the total students in
computing, the threshold for a notable historical period was reduced, and instead was defined by
periodsof volatility relativeto thoseof more stablecounts.
Onceanotableshiftwasidentified,weusedGoogleandGoogleScholartosearchfororganiza-
tions, events, figures, and publications pertaining to major historical events of relevance for each
group. Phrases such as “Black or African American women in computing in the early 1990s” or
“ComputingorganizationsforHispanicorLatinaorLatinoorLatinx”werequeriedtoidentifykey
figures, groups, or events. In addition, since frequently there were few, if any, directly applica-
bleresults,weoftenexpandedoursearchtoincludenotablewomen,groups,oreventspertaining
to STEM disciplines. For any informal blogs or articles identified, we did further query Google
Scholar for validated publications on the topic/event, or we searched the organization page di-
rectlyto confirmnames,years,orotherinformation thatwas unsubstantiatedelsewhere.
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:8 S. Lunn et al.
Fig. 2. Race and ethnicity demographics in the United States in 2018, based on numbers from the U.S. Census
Bureau [ 13].
4 RESULTS
Prior literature has noted that computer science tends to struggle not only with enrollment but
alsowithretainingstudents[ 95,112].Therefore,weconsideredundergraduatedemographicsover
time.Inthissection,wefirstpresentthedemographicsintheU.S.toestablishacomparativebase-
lineinSection 4.1.Then,wepresentthefindingsfromthequantitativeresultsintoenrollmentsin
Section4.2andgraduationratesinSection 4.3.Finally,weprovideabriefoverviewofthequalita-
tive searchfindings for thehistoricalcontext analysisinSection 4.4.
4.1 Demographics in theU.S. in 2018
ItisimportanttoestablishsomeofthegeneraldemographicsintheU.S.forcontext.Accordingto
the latest U.S. Census Bureau reports, Whites represent 76.3% of the total population, and 60.1%
when considering the White (not Hispanic) designation [ 13]. Likewise, Black/African Americans
are 13.4%, American Indian and Alaska Natives are 1.3%, and Asians are 5.9% of the population.
Furthermore, 18.5% of the total population are Hispanic/Latino. Women are actually 50.8% of the
total demographics. Since we will consider the intersectionality of individuals in MIDFIELD, we
further disaggregate these by race and gender, to demonstrate the overall demographics in the
U.S. in 2018 in Figure 2. However, these statistics are not reflective of the breakdown of different
populationsin computing.
4.2 Enrollments
4.2.1 Total Enrollments Over Time. First, we considered the intersectionality of race/ethnicity
and gender for women enrolled in computing fields, as shown in Figure 3. This was a measure of
t h ee n r o l l m e n ti nC S( n=42,865) between 1987 and 2018. We will present the disaggregated data
startingwiththewomen and thenfollowing upwithallstudents.
Althoughwomenrepresent50.8%ofthegeneralpopulationintheU.S.[ 13],incomputingtheir
enrollment is far lower. White women in computing tend to have the highest enrollments rela-
tive to other racial/ethnic backgrounds, yet they only accounted for 19.7% of the total comput-
ing population at its highest (in 1987), and they continued to diminish thereafter, reaching their
lowest levels at 7.6% in 2018. The one notable exception to this is Black women, who had the
highestenrollment of any racial/ethnicgroup in 1991at 14.3%of thepopulation.Thispeakwasa
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:9
Fig. 3. Computing enrollments for women only, from 1987 to 2018.
Fig. 4. Computing enrollments for all students, from 1987 to 2018.
substantialincreasefromtheinitialenrollmentratesof6.6%(in1987).Furthermore,afterachieving
higherenrollmentsin1991,Blackwomencontinuedtodiminishinthetotalpopulation,reaching
lessthan5% in 2000,witha continueddeclinethroughthenew millennia. By 2018numberswere
down to0.7%.
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:10 S. Lunn et al.
Additionally,Asian,Hispanic/Latinx,andNativeAmericanwomensawconsistentlylowrepre-
sentation throughout the data. However, unlike Black women, whose representation in the total
population declined over time, Asian women did increase, starting in 1987 at 0.7% of the popula-
tion, but rising to 4.0% in 2018. Also, Native American women reach their highest representation
levels at 0.8% in 2007, but otherwise rarely reach 0.5% and are even as low as 0.0% several years,
including 2004, 2008, 2012, 2017, and 2018. Meanwhile, Hispanic/Latinx women are represented
far less in computing than they are in the general population (as shown in Figure 2), peaking at
merely 2.0% of the total computing student enrollment in 2002. Without further information, we
areunabletoknowwhichgroupsidentifiedaseitherinternationalorother,soforthepurposesof
thisdiscussion,we willnotinclude theirnumbers.
Furthermore,whenconsideringallstudents,asshowninFigure 4,wecanvisuallyseethestark
contrast to the representation of women in computing. Consistent with prior work, White men
continuetorepresentthelargestpercentageoftotalenrollmentacrossallyearsconsidered.Specif-
ically, White men’s enrollment ranged between 46.7% at their lowest representation of the total
computing population (in 2017) and 62.8% at their highest (in 2006). Although Asian men in this
dataset do occur in computing at rates higher than observed in the general population, they still
are lower than the representation in computing mentioned in other work [ 11,39]. We posit this
is due to the presence of an “International” category, which may also encompass students in this
group. In this dataset by 2018, Asian men represented 9.5% of enrollment, and International men
represented9.1%.
We observed that Black men have higher representation than Asian men, peaking in 1991 at
11.1%. However, Black men do become less prevalent in computing over time, dropping from
8.1% of the population in 2004 to as low as 1.71% in 2017, and then ending in 2018 with 2.3%
enrollmentrates.Inpart,weanticipatethedrop-offin2004resultedfromachangeinthedataset,
which did lose reporting from an HBCU that year. Accordingly, this may have over-inflated the
representationofBlackmeninthecomputingtotals,makingitappearasthoughtheywereahigher
proportional representation. Antithetically, even with HBCU data, Black men are still underrep-
resented compared to White men (and even women). This illustrates the importance of including
minorityservinginstitutionsindemographicdata,togetmoreaccurateportrayalsacrossinstitu-
tions. It also draws attention to the gross underrepresentation of Black men in computing. Often
educationresearchignoresthispopulationduetotheoverrepresentationofmeninthisfield[ 102].
ForNativeAmericanmen,thegreatestenrollmentpercentagesseenwerein2011,butthisonly
represented 1.4% of the total population in computing. As for Hispanic men, they started at 2.9%
in 1987 but rose to 7.6% of enrollments in 2017. Although they are still hugely underrepresented
relativetotheirpresenceinthegeneralpopulation,thiswasatleastanupwardtrajectoryrelative
to therestofthecomputingpopulation.
4.3 Graduation Rates
For graduation rates, we present the data between 1987 and 2012. The rates of graduation for
women in computing fields is shown in Figure 5. Overall, we observe lower levels of graduation
foreachgroupthanwedidforenrollment,suggestinganattritionproblem.Intermsoftheirgradu-
ationrates,Whitewomenpeakedearlyon,withgraduationratesof23.3%in1990.However,White
womencontinuedtodeclineafterthisyear,droppingtotheirlowestin2007,wheretheyconsisted
of only 4.0% of the total graduations. Although the time to graduation may vary by student, this
is still fairly low assuming four or five years to obtain a degree would mean a drop-off from their
12.3%enrollment in 2002and 12.1%in2003.
In addition, Black women peaked at 9.3% in 1995, which would be consistent with their peak
enrollments four years prior in 1991. However, this too represents a dropoff between the levels
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:11
Fig. 5. Computing graduations for women only, from 1987 to 2012.
Fig. 6. Computing graduations for all students, from 1987 to 2012.
enrolled and the representation of Black women in the total computing population upon gradua-
tion.Additionally,Blackwomenreachedtheirlowestratesofgraduationin2005,representingonly
0.6%ofthetotalgraduates.Interestingly,Asianwomentendedtorepresentalargerpercentageof
graduates in computing than they represented in enrollments. Asian women were at the highest
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:12 S. Lunn et al.
between 1999 and 2000, at 4.2% and 4.0% of the total graduations, respectively. They were also at
theirlowestin2007.Meanwhile,Hispanicwomenconsistentlywerelessthan2.0%,onlyreaching
1.6% at their highest (in 2009). Unfortunately, the data suggests that there were many years that
Native American women had no graduates. Native American women reached their highest levels
in 2011at0.5%.
The graduation rate trends for all students in computing fields is illustrated in Figure 6. Again,
thelargestdemographicwithregardstograduationrateswasWhitemen,whichrangedbetween
45.2% (1989) and 71.8% in 2007. The highest graduation rate seen for non-White men was Asian
men in 2004, which had a 10.6% graduation rate. However, it should be noted that these rates are
proportionally higher than the percentage of Asians represented in the general population (see
Figure2).Furthermore,Blackmenhadtheirhighestgraduationratesin1996,peakingat8.6%,but
were quite variable otherwise.Black men were observed as dropping, and remaining, beneath 5%
from2005onward.Meanwhile,Hispanicmensawtheirhighestgraduationratesof5.4%(in2006),
and their lowest levels at 0.6% (in 2005). For many years Native American men had no graduates
as well,in spiteofthosetrendstheydid reach2.0%in2006.
4.4 QualitativeResults Informing Historical ContextAnalysis
We searched between 1987 and 2018 for events, figures, and organizations pertaining to under-
representedgroupsincomputing.Inparticular,weexploredliteratureforperiodsofnotableshifts
identified in the quantitative results. We will describe the historical context further in Section 5.
H o w e v e r ,w ed ow a n tt op o i n to u tt h a ti nt h ep r o c e s so fs e a r c h i n g ,w ew e r eo n l ya b l et oi d e n -
tify a small amount of information about women, and especially women of color, in computing.
Whilethiswasinpartduetothetimespansearched(1987–2018),andtherewerenotablewomenin
STEM,theywerenotcomputing-related.Themostnotableobservationwasthedearthofliterature
on minoritized women in computing and their contributions to the discipline. While there were
mentionsinpopularworksorinformalblogs,therewerelimitedhistoricalcontributionsdescribed
in scholarly publications. This absence of rigorous, scholarly work focused on the contributions
of women of colorto computingshouldbe investigatedinfuturework.
5 DISCUSSION
The MIDFIELD database provided a unique opportunity to explore and amplify the status of
women at the intersection of race and gender over time in computing. While this exploration
largelyyieldedresultsconsistentwithotherreports,inthatWhitemenrepresentthehighestpro-
portionofenrollmentandgraduationratesofallstudentsincomputing,italsoprovidedaclearand
oftenoverlookedinsightintothestateofwomenovertime.Althoughwedonotexploretheother
attributes in the MIDFIELD dataset, future work should explore trends associated with courses
taken,GPA,SAT/ACT scores,andotherattributesforindividualstudentsover time.
Whiletheremaybeavarietyoffactorsthatcontributetopatternsofenrollment,persistence,and
graduation,inSection 5.1wedescribesomepotentialhistoricalandculturaleventsandinfluences
that may have lead to the shifts observed in the MIDFIELD dataset for women, and particularly
for Black women, Hispanic/Latinx women, Native American women, and Asian women. Then,
we make suggestions about how to improve the participation of women and underrepresented
racial/ethnicgroupsin Section 5.2.
5.1 HistoricalEvents and CulturalShiftsImpacting Participation in Computing
From a historical perspective, a number of changes may account for some of the observed trends
intheMIDFIELDdataset.Inthissection,wewillexploresomeoftheprograms,organizations,and
initiativesthatmayhavehadanimpactonthemajorpositiveandnegativeshiftsweobserved.All
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:13
of these efforts could be identified as factors that contributed to the diversity shifts in computing
enrollment. We begin in Section 5.1.1by consideringkey developments for broadeningparticipa-
tionof women in computingfields.
Sincewedefinedintersectionality,weknowthattoooften,researchonwomencanbemislead-
ingwithregardstoengagement.Merelylookingattrendsofwomenoftenresultsintheomissionof
thefullpictureofthevarioustrendsofBlack,Hispanic,andNativeAmericanwomeninthefields
of computing. As has been demonstrated, they have their own patterns of engagement [ 86,94].
Accordingly, we discuss Black women in Section 5.1.2. Then, we review Hispanic/Latinx women
in Section 5.1.3. In Section 5.1.4, Native American women are addressed. Finally, we cover Asian
w o m e ni nS ec t i o n 5.1.5.
5.1.1 Major Developments for Women in Computing Fields. Inthissection,wewilldiscussbroad
initiativestoengageunderrepresentedgroupsincomputing,withafocusonwomen.Forreference,
weprovideabroadtimelineofhistoricaleventsrelativetoenrollmentsofwomeninAppendix A.
While it is not necessary to contextualize women in relation to men, we will do so to provide
framingfor thosethatmay notbeawareof thedisparity.
Relative to the men in the MIDFIELD dataset, women tended to have lower enrollment and
graduationratesoverall.Thisisconsistentwithotherreportsandresearch[ 3].Incomputerscience,
the number of bachelor’s degrees awarded to women increased from a few hundred in 1970 to
almost 14,000 in the late 1980s [ 88]. However, it started to decline in 1990, and then stagnated in
the mid-1990s. Overall, we observe that women never rise above 20% enrollments for any racial
or ethnic group. Moreover, even White women, which tend to have the highest rates for women
overall, arewellbelow thepercentagesforWhitemen.
White women had their highest representation in total enrollment in 1987, a time that also in-
cluded some major developments towards the inclusivity of women in computing. In 1987, Dr.
Anita Borg and 12 other women in computer science started a community connected via email,
called Systers, to discuss problems at work, technical issues, and to share resources [ 1,3]. Al-
though initially established for communication between women in academia, it later grew to in-
cludewomen from industryas well [ 3].
Between1993and1994,therewasadeclineintheenrollmentofbothBlackandWhitewomen
intheMIDFIELDdataset.Accordingly,thisdeclinecouldhavebeenthemotivationbehindseveral
individuals and organizations created in the 1990s to facilitate the development of a more inclu-
siveenvironment.Afterrecognizingthattherewasunequalrepresentationincomputing,theACM
createdacommitteein1990tobroadenparticipation[ 3].Onefocuswastoundopoliciesthatgave
unfairadvantagesonthebasisofraceorgender;althoughdespiteintentions,fewactionabledeci-
sionsandmeasureswereactuallyachieved[ 3].However,in1993anewcommitteewasestablished
called the Committee on the Status of Women in Computing. Later, this committee was renamed
toACMCommitteeonWomeninComputing(ACM-W).Accordingtohistoricalrecords,theytried
toencourageactivitieslikementoring,orpromotionoftheaccomplishmentsofwomen,tobolster
therepresentationof women.
Then in 1994, the Grace Hopper Celebration (GHC) of Women in Computing, co-founded by
Dr.AnitaBorgandDr.TelleWhitney,wascreatedasaconferenceforwomenintechnologyfrom
around the world [ 1,110]. Prior studies have demonstrated that celebrations of women’s contri-
butionstoacommunityareimportantforfosteringasenseofcommunity[ 103].Moreover,itwas
reported that not only did attendees report feeling “[ ...]inspiredbytherolemodelstheysaw
attheconference[...]”butmorethanhalfreportedtheyintendedtocontinuetocommunicate
withotherparticipantsatsuchevents.Inaddition,theAnitaBorgInstitute(ABI)soughttoexpand
internationally,whichitdid witha 2010Grace HopperCelebrationinIndia.
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:14 S. Lunn et al.
The creation of GHC was followed by the establishment of a not-for-profit called the Institute
for Women and Technology (IWT) on the Xerox PARC campus in 1997 by Dr. Anita Borg, with
the intent to improve women’s participation in computing and engineering fields [ 1,110]. Upon
Dr. Borg’s passing in 2003, Dr. Telle Whitney and the board of directors renamed this group the
Anita Borg Institute [ 1]. In addition to supporting Systers and Grace Hopper, they also created
severalworkshopstohelpwomendevelopskillsandleadership,suchas“DevelopingandRunning
EffectiveOrganizationsandInstitutions”[ 3].Inaddition,theyheldhackathons,networkingevents,
offered careerservices,andcreateda forumforexecutivesin technology.
In 1997, the NSF also developed the Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and
Education (POWRE) Program, with the intention of highlighting women in STEM fields [ 41]. In
2001,thisprogramwascombinedintoADVANCE,aprogramestablishedtosupportgenderequity.
Additionally, the ACM Richard Tapia Celebration of Diversity in Computing was first launched
in 2001 as a symposium [ 7]. It was established to encourage diverse networks that would allow
students, faculty, and professionals the chance to connect. Then in 2004, the NSF also chartered
the National Center for Women & Information Technology (NCWIT) to improve participation of
w o m e ni nc o m pu t i n g[ 40].
According to MIDFIELD, in 2009 Black women reached some of their lowest enrollments, dip-
ping down to 0.9%, and the enrollments of White women went from 17.1% in 2009 down to 12.5%
in 2010, and then even lower in 2011 at 9.3%. Although these declines may be the result of many
things, they also may have been the impetus for some efforts we present to improve the repre-
sentation of women. Girl Develop It was established by Sara Chipps and Vanessa Hurstin in 2010
tooffereventslikemeetupsandhackathons,aswellaslow-costcoursesoncomputingtopics[ 3].
Furthermore, PyLadies was founded in 2011 as an international coding and support network for
women, with a focus on the Python programming language [ 35]. In 2012, the she++ conference
was established at Stanford University by Ayna Agarwal and Ellora Israni, to encourage women
to pursue computing careers [ 3]. Not only did this event include attendance from several major
technology companies, but she++ went on to establish a fellowship and mentoring program for
high schooland college students[ 3,91].
Additionally, in an attempt to attract girls to computing from a younger age, Black Girls Code
(foundedin2011)andGirlsWhoCode(foundedin2012)wereestablished[ 22,56].BlackGirlsCode
is a group founded specifically for women of color by Kimberly Bryant, that has mentored over
14,000 girls in the United States and South Africa [ 56]. Meanwhile, Girls Who Code was founded
byReshmaSaujaniandbeganas20girlsinasinglestateandhassinceexpandedtoroughly10,000
girls across 42 states [ 22]. Both work to help girls develop their coding skills through classes,
programs, and workshops, and were created to encourage girls to pursue careers in computing
fields [22,56]. These organizations serve to establish a supportive community for women, and to
build“[...]theconfidencetheyneedtos ucceedinatraditionallymale-dominatedindustry[...]”
[22]. Also, 90% of the graduates from the Girls Who Code summer immersion program stated
that they intended to select a major or minor in a computing field. Although it is too early to
substantiatethisbyactualenrollments,itdoesrepresentapositiveintentcreatedbysuchprograms
to encourageamore diversepopulationto considercomputingas anoccupationalpursuit.
5.1.2 Black Women. Minority serving institutions have demonstrated the ability to foster a
sense of community and belonging amongst diverse populations and have been lauded for their
contributiontodiversifyingSTEM[ 73].HBCUsinparticular,haveachievedthegoalofimproving
academicoutcomesforBlack/AfricanAmericans[ 3,76].AfricanAmericanstudentsatHBCUsare
less likely than students at PWIs to report feelings of isolation, racial discrimination, or lack of
socialoracademicintegration[ 96].Furthermore,HBCUshavetraditionallybeenalargeproducer
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:15
of African American STEM baccalaureate degree recipients. As of 2007, there were 89 four-year
and 14 two-year HBCUs. In addition to these HBCUs, there are approximately 50 predominantly
Blackuniversities,whicharedefinedasinstitutionsinwhichstudentenrollmentismorethanhalf
AfricanAmerican[ 12,73].IntheMIDFIELD,therearetwoHBCUsthatreport,whichmayimpact
some oftheenrollment and graduationsnumbersobservedbetween1987and2004.
Although efforts have been made to increase the participation of Blacks/African Americans in
STEM fields, numbers still remain low [ 3]. Moreover, often graduation percentages tend to be
lower than enrollments, suggesting there is an attrition problem. It is important to continue the
research to investigate the contributing factors. However, as seen in our results, there are several
periods of time where there have been peaks and valleys for both Black women and men. For
reference,weprovideabroadtimelineofhistoricaleventsrelativetoenrollmentsofBlackwomen
in Appendix B.
We observe two major shifts for Black enrollment rates in the MIDFIELD dataset. The first of
which include spikes in the early 1990s for Black women; and for which is also a corresponding
peak in graduation several years after the fact. We cannot infer direct causality from our work;
however, there were a number of historical, political, cultural, and psychosocial factors that im-
pacted the Black population. There were several movements for racial justice that occurred at
universities in the late 1980s and early 1990s [ 3]. In 1987 and 1988, the appearance of racial fliers
attheUniversityofWisconsinencouragedtheadministrationtoact[ 34].Thechancellorpledged
to double minority enrollment, to increase minority faculty hiring, to require culturalorientation
fornewstudents,andtoamendtheuniversity’scourseofferingtoincreasecoursesforBlacksand
Hispanics. Also, racial crimes committed at the University of Massachusetts (in 1988) resulted in
200minoritystudentsparticipatinginasix-daysit-inattheAfricaHouse[ 3].Thispeacefulprotest
was conducted to demand more stringent punishment for racial violence, and to request a more
multi-cultural curriculum. The administration agreed to both. Furthermore, in 1989 students at
HowardUniversityledprotestsagainsttheappointmentofLeeAtwater(theChairmanoftheRe-
publican NationalCommittee) to the university’s board of trustees[ 3,27,64]. Based on historical
reports, the students felt his views were contrary to those of minorities and demanded his res-
ignation, which did indeed occur. Additionally, the Supreme Court made a ruling in 1992 (in the
caseofU.S.v.Fordice)thatMississippineededtotakemoreinitiativetointegratetheirWhiteand
Blackinstitutions[ 3].Combined,theseincidents(andtheresultinggains)mayhaveledtonation-
wideresistantcapitalandempowermentforBlacks/AfricanAmericansthatmayhaveencouraged
greaterenrollment in theearly1990s.
It is difficult to say how these events directly impacted students’ choice to pursue computing.
However,wedoknowthattheseshiftscreatedanopportunityforaccessforBlackstudentsleading
to an overall enrollment shift, and computing was a beneficiary. Given recent unrest, (the 2020
resurgenceoftheBlackLivesMattermovement,inpartduetothemurderofGeorgeFloyd),there
hasbeenacalltoactionfromthecomputingcommunitytonotjustbeabeneficiarybutanactive
leader of change [ 51]. As a community, we have an opportunity to raise the profile of computing
anditsimpactonsocialjusticetoenticeanewwaveofdiversecomputingstudentsintothefield.
Beyond the changes observed in the 1990s, we also observe that Black men and women de-
cline around 2004 in computing. However, the decrease in enrollment around 2003–2004 may be
attributed to the loss of HBCUs in the dataset. MIDFIELD schools do include a large percentage
of Black graduates [ 61], and as previously mentioned, two HBCUs stopped reporting around this
time. Therefore, although there are several schools in the dataset that historically are responsible
for producing high levels of Black graduates [ 61], these two could account for this trend. This is
something to consider not only with MIDFIELD but also in other work with longitudinal data,
that inclusion of different types of MSIs could lead to meaningful data on distinct populations.
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:16 S. Lunn et al.
Accordingly, we want to emphasize that researchersshould consider the impact of sampling, and
greater inclusionformore accuratereporting.
Without the HBCUs, as mentioned previously, enrollment for Black women reaches its lowest
levels in 2009, and is also only at 1.0% of the total computing population in 2012. Several groups
werecreatedaroundthistimetopromoteBlack/AfricanAmericansuccess,whichmayleadtolong
termenrollmentsandretention,althoughweareunabletopredictbasedonourpresentdata.Black
WomeninComputing(BWiC)wasestablishedin2011byDr.DanielleCummings,alongwiththe
ABI, to encourage the participation of Black women and other minorities in the field [ 53]. Then
in 2013, an NSF grant was awarded to establish the Institute for African-American Mentoring in
Computing Sciences (iAAMCS) [ 38]. Although created locally, it became a national resource de-
signedtoimprovetheparticipationofBlack/AfricanAmericanstudentsincomputingbycreating
programsandprovidingmentoring,training,researchgrants,andpeermentoring[ 37].In2016,to
furthertheirmission,theNationalSocietyforBlacksinComputing(NSBC)conferencewascreated
underthesupportofiAAMCS.TheseeffortshavehadamajorimpactonBlackenrollmentincom-
puter science PhD programs. Furthermore, the inaugural BWiC conference (BlackComputeHER)
was held at Howard University for students, faculty, and professionals in 2017 [ 15]. This initial
gathering served, and continues to serve, to facilitate discussion surrounding gender and race in
technology fields, and to provide resources and support for Black women during their education
and careers.
5.1.3 Hispanic/Latinx Women. Hispanic populations in the U.S. have grown rapidly over the
past several decades. This group grew by roughly 60% in the 1990s [ 3], although we do not see
an increase in computing enrollment until the early 2000s. In particular, we note enrollments of
Hispanic women peak at 2.0% in 2002. However, leading up to this time frame, there were sev-
eral notable shifts in culture, and historical events that may have led to this rise in the Hispanic
populationinSTEMfields,andespeciallyincomputing.Weprovideabroadtimelineofhistorical
events relativeto enrollmentsof Hispanic/Latinxwomen forreferencein Appendix C.
In 1986, the Hispanic Association of College and Universities (HACU) was established by aca-
demic and business leaders to promote higher education for Hispanics [ 3]. Then, as part of the
Higher Education Act in 1992, HACU wrote language included in the bill passed by Congress to
createHispanic-ServingInstitutions.HSIshavedemonstratedanimportantroleincontributingto
improvingbothenrollmentandgraduationratesinSTEMfields[ 73].Atpresent,itisreportedthat
althoughHSIsrepresentlessthan6%ofpost-secondaryinstitutionsintheU.S.,approximatelyhalf
of theHispanic/Latinxstudentsthatattendcollege areenrolled in HSIs[ 95,111].
UnlikeHBCUs,whicharehistoricallydefinedexpresslytoprovideaccesstoaparticularminor-
ity,HSIsareenrollment-based[ 73].Accordingly,thisdesignationcouldbeawardedtouniversities
inwhichthetotalstudentpopulationcontainedaminimumof25%Hispanics.Moreover,thisruling
mandatedthatHSIsthathadaminimumof50low-incomestudentsenrolled,wereabletoapplyfor
TitleIIIfunding.However,asaresult,thecurriculaforHSIsarelessdefinedthanHBCUs,namely,
theabsenceofeducationtailoredto theethnicbackgroundof Hispanics.
Inaddition,therewereseveralnoteworthyeventsforHispanicprofessionalsincomputing.Dr.
EllenOchoaworkedtodevelopopticalandcomputinghardwaresystemsthatwereusedbyNASA
[77,90]. In 1993, she was the first Latina astronaut to go into space, aboard the space shuttle
Discovery [ 77]. There were also several professional societies created to foster a sense of com-
munity, such as Latinos in Science and Engineering (MAES) and Society of Hispanic Professional
Engineers (SHPE) [ 3]. In 1996, The Hispanic Technology and Telecommunications Partnership
(HTTP)wasestablishedtorepresenttheLatinopopulationinpoliciespertainingtotelecommuni-
cationandtechnology[ 80].TechLatinowascreatedin1997asa“technology-focusedprofessional
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:17
organization”thatoffersseminars,workshops,research,andpolicyanalysisforprofessionals,stu-
dents,andbusinesses[ 72].Additionally,theComputingAllianceofHispanic-servingInstitutions
(CAHSI)wasfoundedin2006underanNSFinitiative,toamelioratetherepresentationofHispanics
enrolled in universities and present in industry [ 20]. Also, in 2006, a group of Latinas gathered at
GraceHopperCelebrationandformedLatinasinComputing,agroupthatisinvolvedindifferent
workshops, conferences, and professional groups to form a network of Hispanic women/Latinas
[54]. Furthermore,in partnershipwith HTTP, the Latino TechSummit was establishedin 2016 to
createacommunityofHispanics/Latinxindividualsandcompaniesthatworkintechnology[ 98].
5.1.4 Native American Women. MorethanathirdofNativeAmericancollegeoruniversityen-
rollees are older than 30, roughly two thirds are women, and typically these students are finan-
ciallyindependent[ 3,97].AlthoughanincreasingnumberofTCUsofferbachelor’sandgraduate
degrees, several only offer certifications or two-year degrees [ 107,108]. Thus, although Native
Americans are about 1.3% of the total population, they represent roughly 0.5% of engineering en-
rollment[ 13,57].Moreover,NativeAmericansaretypicallylesslikelytopursueaSTEMgraduate
degree,andadvanceddegreesareusuallyinthefieldsofeducation,business,history,orsocialsci-
ence[32].InMIDFIELD,weobservelowlevelsofenrollmentsandgraduationratesincomputing
forbothmenandwomen.Weprovideabroadtimelineofhistoricaleventsrelativetoenrollments
of NativeAmerican women inAppendix D.
Several programs and initiatives were established for Native Americans over time. In the late
1960s, the first tribal colleges were established to encourage higher education without requiring
anassimilationintoWhiteculture[ 3,46].Also,in1994theyweregrantedlandstatusbyCongress,
whichensuredongoingfunding.Presently,thereare37fullyaccreditedTCUs,althoughlessthan
one fifth of all Native Americans that are enrolled in college are enrolled in a TCU. However,
enrollments more than doubled at TCUs between 1990 and 2005. In 2000, the NSF established the
TribalCollegesandUniversitiesProgram(TCUP)tosupporttechnologyupgradesandthepurchase
of equipment, and to promote outreach [ 3]. Furthermore, the South Dakota School of Mines and
Technologydevelopedaprogramin2008calledTiospaye,tosupporttheenrollmentandretention
ofNativeAmericanstudents[ 57].Aspartofthisprogram,notonlyisfinancialsupportgivenbut
alsoemotionalsupportintheformofcounseling,andprofessionalsupportintheformofadvising,
networking, and mentoring. In MIDFIELD, although there are no formal TCUs, we do have one
school that has a Tiospaye program, and this university reported demographics for 20 years of
theMIDFIELDdata.WhiletheseendeavorslikelyinfluencetheparticipationofNativeAmericans
in higher education, they have done little to influence computing enrollment. Native American
women and men are woefully underrepresented with little to no support of their engagement in
computing.
5.1.5 Asian Women. AsiansareoftenreportedasbeingpresentinSTEMfieldsatahigherpro-
portionthantheirrepresentationinthegeneralpopulation.Assuch,Asiansareoftenneglectedin
computing research and funding initiatives [ 17,62,100]. Yet, when data is further disaggregated
onthebasisofintersectionalityAsianwomenhavefarlowerlevelsofrepresentationincomputing
than Asian men in the computing workforce and should therefore be considered independently
[25].Moreover,althoughcertainAsiannationalitiessuchasIndian,Chinese,andKoreanaremore
common in computing, others such as the Hmong and the Vietnamese are still underrepresented
[3]. In MIDFIELD, we do not observe Asians’ enrollments ever reaching as high as their repre-
sentationinthegeneralpopulation.Therefore,exploringtheexperiencesandperceptionofAsian
women can provide insight to fill the gaps. In the MIDFIELDdataset, Asiansexperience a decline
between 2003 and 2004, but then continue to climb, and reach their highest enrollments in 2018.
Whilenosingulareventoreventssurroundtheseyears,severalnotablehistoricaloccurrencesdid
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:18 S. Lunn et al.
occur between 1987 and 2018 for the Asian computing community. We provide a broad timeline
of historicalevents relativeto enrollmentsof Asian women forreferencein Appendix E.
Qiheng Hu is a computer scientist, whose work on the National Computing and Networking
Facility of China (NCFC) project and talks with NSF are attributed to the launch of the internet
in China [ 66,105]. In 1994, a TCP/IP connection was set up to connect China to the World Wide
Web [66].MadamHucontinuedtodevelopanonlinepresenceinthecountry,andco-foundedthe
InternetSocietyof China (ISC)in2001[ 92].
In 2007, AANAPISIs were established as another enrollment-based MSI [ 73]. In particular, this
designationwasawardedtoschoolswhereatleast10%ofthepopulationwereAsianAmericansor
Pacific Islanders, and where half of the students were considered low-income based on their par-
ticipation in the Federal Pell Grant [ 67,73,78,79]. By 2012, it was reported that 153 institutions
were eligible for this designation, but only 78 institutions officially filed to receive this title [ 79].
In addition, the Society of Asian Scientists and Engineers (SASE), was also established in 2007 to
support Asian professionals in science and engineering fields and to encourage support in local
communities [ 68]. Additionally, the China Computer Federation (CCF) is a professional comput-
ing group that has partnerships with ACM and IEEE [ 19]. However, this organization is specific
for China, and the official language used for journals and conferences is Chinese, which limits
its extendability to other Asian populations. When trying to find a computing specific group or
organization that did encompass a broader Asian population, we were unable to find any, which
is somethingthatshouldbeconsideredin thefuture.
5.2 Working toBroaden Participation
Overall,theculturalshiftsthroughouthistoryhaveledtomanyattemptstobroadenparticipation,
includingtheestablishmentoforganizationsandgroupstohelpbuildupcommunitiesforwomen
incomputing.However,wemustacknowledgethateachstudentisunique,andnosinglestrategy
can be employed to encourage the persistence of all underrepresented groups. Nonetheless, it is
importanttoconsiderthedifferencesininstructionalstylesandtrainingthatcanfosterheightened
interestandsupport.Studentsthatcomefromculturalbackgroundsvaluingcollectivismoverindi-
vidualismmayfindthemselvespreferringpeercodingorgroupprojectstoindividualassignments
[93].Furthermore,supportivepeernetworkshavebeenshowntobecriticalforrecruitingAfrican
AmericanandLatinostudentsinhighschoolsintocomputingclasses[ 49].Wesuggestthatcolleges
and universities should review their own curricula for potential areas of improvement, and could
perhaps offer increased mentoring opportunities and peer support via the addition of discussion
groupsor teachingassistantstoprovide handsonactivitiesformore theoreticalconcepts.
Morecreativeapproaches,andespeciallythosethathighlightculturallyrelevantpedagogy,may
servetoincreaseinterestandtofacilitatelearningoftopicsstudentsmayotherwisefindchalleng-
ing. One such example was an initiative created at Spelman College, a private historically Black
liberal arts college for women, in which DJing tasks were used to enhance learning of data struc-
tures [55]. Black music (which the author defined as “any genre of music created by people from
the African Diaspora, such as Hip Hop, R&B, Jazz, Soul, Blues, Gospel, etc.”) was used to teach
major concepts like classes, arrays, linked lists, and inheritance; physical instruments were also
modeledusingalgorithms.Reactionsincludedcommentslike“Iwasabletoincorporateanimpor-
tantpartofBlackhistorywhichIthinkisessentialtomakingtechnologyaccessibletoall”and“It
has helped put the new code into a real life perspective.” While this course was established with
a specific target demographic of Black women, this outside the box way of making challenging
conceptsapproachableisa notionmore universitiesshouldconsider.
Furthermore, we cannot deny the impact that government-led or funded initiatives have had
on moving the needle. The literal buy-in from the National Science Foundation through funding
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:19
mechanisms has established many of the programs discussed above, that have expanded access
andsupportforBlackandbrownpeopleincomputing.Likewise,theinvisiblelaborofthosefrom
theleastrepresentedgroups,beitwomen,Blacks,Hispanics/Latinxs,NativeAmericans,orAsians
in creating their own communities, organizations, and support structures is commendable and
arguably, invaluable to professional identity development and the persistence of minority engi-
neering and computer science students [ 33,84,87,101]. Despite the slow movement, there is
still opportunity to invest, expand, and grow the profession for the better through broadening
participation.
6 LIMITATIONS
While these findings demonstrate some interesting trends in enrollments and graduation rates
in computing fields, there are several limitations to this work. First, the correlation presented
is merely speculative and this work is not a comprehensive literature review. Furthermore, the
dataset itself is subject to vicissitudes in representation of different schools. As mentioned previ-
ously,althoughMIDFIELDrepresentsoneofthelargestlongitudinaldatasets,especiallyforinter-
sectionaldata,not alluniversitiesreportedeachyear.
Furthermore, all ethnic/racial data collected is reported by universities based on students’ self-
identification and over the years, the categorizations have changed, at times creating ambiguity.
Furthermore,includingcategoriessuchasInternationalandAsianmayhaveledtosomeconfusion,
resulting in participants being uncertain which to choose. This could explain, in part, why the
numbers we observe for Asian students is lower than the rates reported elsewhere, particularly
for Asian men [ 4]. Moreover, data was collected solely as a gender binary, and we acknowledge
thatthispracticeisexclusionaryand shouldbeupdatedto bemore inclusive.
Asmentioned,NSF,CRA,andACMalsopublishreportsoncomputingdemographics[ 4,44,81].
However,thedecisiontoincludecertainmajors,ortoexcludefor-profitinstitutionscanimpactthe
findingsinthepopulation,andnoneofthesereportsincludelongtermintersectionalinformation.
Assuch,directcomparisontoMIDFIELDwasinfeasible,sowewereunabletovalidatetheresults
observedin ourdatasetwithothersourcesofparticipationdata.
7 CONCLUSION
Goingforward,itisimportantforresearcherstocontinuetoexaminewhatcontributestotheen-
rollment and graduation rates of computing students. Despite initiatives to remediate enrollment
and persistence of underrepresented groups in computing, women in computing have not seen
substantial increases. Furthermore, considering the intersectionality of gender and race or eth-
nicity, we observe that White women, Black women and men, Hispanic/Latinx women and men,
NativeAmericanwomenandmen,andAsianwomenareparticularlyunderrepresented.Assuch,
itisimportanttofurthertheiruniquepathwaystocomputing,andthefactorsinfluencingpersis-
tenceofthesepopulations,notasanaggregate,butinsteadontheirownterms.Workthatexplores
intersectional experiences could aid in finding new ways to engage and maintain these groups in
computingfields.Theanalysispresentedisintendedtoencourageeducatorsandadministratorsto
further investigate these intersectional experiences, so that they can provide more targeted sup-
port for students with equity in mind and evaluate practices that may limit the participation of
women and racial/ethnicminorities.
One potential option is to try to engage women re-entering academia at non-traditional time
points. Research suggests that often women leave school for financial reasons or to take care of
family[5,36,58].Recruitingwomenreturningtoeducation,orlookingtoupskillorreskill,could
prove a great potential source of untapped talent to reduce the underrepresentation of women
in computing. Moreover, we recommend additional research into switching behavior, in terms of
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:20 S. Lunn et al.
what encourages women from other majors to enroll and persist in computing. Understanding
what motivates minoritized groups to succeed in computing, despite academic challenges and a
lackofsame-raceandsame-genderpeersandfacultyiscriticaltowardsimprovingtheirretention
andtenacityin theface ofobstacles.
Prior literature has demonstrated the value of peer support and mentoring, and universities
shouldconsiderinclusionorexpansionofsuchprogramsincomputing.Inparticular,recognition
has been shown to play a critical role both in engagement and retention, particularly for women
andwomenofcolor,whomaystruggletocombatstereotypesandclassroompowerdynamics[ 52].
To further understand what can engage different populations and to encourage their persistence,
futureresearchshouldconsiderconductingmorequalitativeanalysisaboutwhatmethodsorpro-
gramsaremosteffectiveatprovidingencouragementforminoritizedgroups,andhowrecognition
can further bolster identity. To this end, we also suggest that more literature formally celebrate
women in computing—since finding positive role models, and highlighting their achievements
could provecriticalin encouragingothers.
Our results also demonstrate the importance of including a wide range of universities when
examining different populations in computing. Datasets should be established with reports from
HBCUs, HSIs, TCUs, and AANAPISIs to gain a clear picture of the landscape. Furthermore, data
collection and analysis should seek to offer intersectional breakdowns to provide greater insight
aboutthenumbersofeachgroup,aswellastheirdistinctiveexperiences.Onlythroughenhanced
understanding can we hope to broaden participation, and to make the field more equitable for all
students.
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:21
APPENDICES
A TIMELINEFOR WOMENRELATIVE TO ENROLLMENTS
We consider key historical events important for women in STEM, to provide context, in Figure 7.
It should be noted that the scale presented is relative to the percentage of total computing stu-
dents,whichincludesbothmalesandfemalesincomputingacrossallinstitutionsthatreportedin
MIDFIELD.
Fig. 7. Timeline for major historical events for women, relative to enrollments between 1987 and 2018.
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:22 S. Lunn et al.
B TIMELINE FOR BLACKWOMEN RELATIVETO ENROLLMENTS
We consider key historical events important for Black women, to provide context, in Figure 8.
It should be noted that the scale presented is relative to the percentage of total computing stu-
dents,whichincludesbothmalesandfemalesincomputingacrossallinstitutionsthatreportedin
MIDFIELD.
Fig. 8. Timeline for major historical events for Black women, relative to enrollments between 1987 and 2018.
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:23
C TIMELINE FOR HISPANIC/LATINXWOMENRELATIVE TO ENROLLMENTS
WeconsiderkeyhistoricaleventsimportantforHispanic/LatinxwomeninSTEM,toprovidecon-
text, in Figure 9. It should be noted that the scale presented is relative to the percentage of total
computing students, which includes both males and females in computing across all institutions
thatreportedinMIDFIELD.
Fig. 9. Timeline for major historical events for Hispanic/Latinx women, relative to enrollments between 1987
and 2018.
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:24 S. Lunn et al.
D TIMELINEFOR NATIVEAMERICANWOMEN RELATIVETO ENROLLMENTS
We consider key historical events important for Native American women, to provide context, in
Figure10.Itshouldbenotedthatthescalepresentedisrelativetothepercentageoftotalcomputing
students,whichincludesbothmalesandfemalesincomputingacrossallinstitutionsthatreported
in MIDFIELD.
Fig. 10. Timeline for major historical events for Native American women, relative to enrollments between
1987 and 2018.
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:25
E TIMELINE FOR ASIAN WOMENRELATIVETO ENROLLMENTS
We consider key historical events important for Asian women, to provide context, in Figure 11.
It should be noted that the scale presented is relative to the percentage of total computing stu-
dents,whichincludesbothmalesandfemalesincomputingacrossallinstitutionsthatreportedin
MIDFIELD.
Fig. 11. Timeline for major historical events for Asian women, relative to enrollments between 1987 and 2018.
REFERENCES
[1] Anitab.org. 2020.Our History: Anitab.org. Retrievedfrom https://anitab.org/about-us/mission-and-history/ .
[2] ShetayNicoleAshford.2016. OurCounter-lifeHerstories:TheExperiencesofAfricanAmericanWomenFacultyinU.S.
Computing Education . Ph.D.Dissertation, University of South Florida.
[3] WilliamAspray.2016. WomenandUnderrepresentedMinoritiesinComputing:AHistoricalandSocialStudy .Springer.
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:26 S. Lunn et al.
[4] ComputingResearchAssociation.2020.TheCRATaulbeeSurvey.Retrievedfrom https://cra.org/resources/taulbee-
survey/.
[5] Martha J. Bailey and Susan M. Dynarski. 2011. Gains and Gaps: Changing Inequality in US College Entry and Com-
pletion.TechnicalReport,NationalBureauof EconomicResearch.
[6] David V. Baker. 1999. A descriptive profile and socio-historical analysis of female executions in the United States:
1632-1997. Women Criminal Justice 10,3(1999),57–93.
[7] Jerri Barrett, Valerie E. Taylor, and Mary Ann Leung. 2019. The ACM richard tapia celebration of diversity in com-
putingconferences,presentedbyCMD-IT. Comput. Sci. Eng. 21,4(2019),88–92.
[8] Kacey Beddoes and Maura Borrego. 2011. Feminist theory in three engineering education journals: 1995–2008. J.
Eng.Edu. 100,2(2011),281–303.
[9] Tessa Berg, Alexander Sharpe, and Emma Aitkin. 2018. Females in computing: Understanding stereotypes through
collaborativepicturing. Comput. Edu. 126(2018),105–114.
[10] Maura J. Borrego, Miguel A. Padilla, Guili Zhang, Matthew W. Ohland, and Timothy J. Anderson. 2005. Gradua-
tion rates, grade-point average, and changes of major of female and minority students entering engineering. In
Proceedings Frontiers in Education 35th Annual Conference .IEEE, T3D–1.
[11] Bo Brinkman and Amanda Diekman. 2016. Applying the communal goal congruity perspective to enhance diver-
sity and inclusion in undergraduate computing degrees. In Proceedings of the 47th ACM Technical Symposium on
Computing Science Education . 102–107.
[12] M. Christopher Brown and James Earl Davis. 2001. The historically Black college as social contract, social capital,
andsocial equalizer. Peabody J.Edu. 76,1(2001),31–49.
[13] United States Census Bureau. 2019. U.S. Census Bureau QuickFacts: United States. Retrieved from https://www.
census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/US .
[14] U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2019. Labor force characteristics by race and ethnicity, 2018. Retrieved from https:
//www.bls.gov/opub/reports/race-and-ethnicity/2018/pdf/home.pdf .
[15] JamikaD.Burge,RyokoYamaguchi,andJakitaO.Thomas.2017.Follow-upworkshop:Blackwomenincomputing:
Aresearchagenda. ComputingandIntersectionality:TheSocialandBehavioralStructuresatPlayforBlackWomenin
theComputing Sciences (2017).
[16] Darrell Norman Burrell. 2020. An exploration of the cybersecurity workforce shortage. In Cyber Warfare and Ter-
rorism: Concepts,Methodologies,Tools,and Applications .IGIGlobal,1072–1081.
[17] JoanBurrelli.2009.WomenofcolorinSTEMeducationandemployment.In Mini-SymposiumonWomenofColorin
Science, Technology,Engineering, and Mathematics, Arlington,VA .
[18] LewisCarson. 1997.SUCCEED quantitativeevaluation. Innovator 8 (1997),32611–6134.
[19] China Computer Federation (CCF). 2020. About CCF. Retrieved from https://www.ccf.org.cn/c/2019-12-01/666146.
shtml.
[20] NationalCAHSI Includes Center.2020.CAHSI OVERVIEW. Retrievedfrom https://cahsi.utep.edu/about/ .
[21] L.J.Charleston,RyanP.Adserias,NicoleM.Lang,andJerlandoF.L.Jackson.2014.IntersectionalityandSTEM:The
roleofraceandgenderintheacademicpursuitsofAfricanAmericanwomeninSTEM. J.Progress.PolicyPractice 2,
3(2014),273–293.
[22] GirlsWhoCode.2015.GirlsWhoCode:AnnualReport2015.Retrievedfrom https://girlswhocode.com/2015report/ .
[23] P.H.Collins andS. Bilge.2016. Intersectionality . PolityPress, Cambridge(UK).
[24] PatriciaHillCollins.2000. BlackFeministThought:Knowledge,Consciousness,andthePoliticsofEmpowerment .Rout-
ledge,NewYork, NY.
[25] ChristianneCorbettandCatherineHill.2015. SolvingtheEquation:TheVariablesforWomen’sSuccessinEngineering
andComputing. ERIC.
[26] Sandra Corlett and Sharon Mavin. 2014. Intersectionality, identity and identity work. Gender Manage. Int. J. 29, 5
(2014),258–276.
[27] Tom Cowan and Jack Maguire. 1995. History’s milestones of African-American higher education. J. Blacks Higher
Edu.7(1995),86–90.
[28] Kimberlé Crenshaw. 1989. Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A black feminist critique of antidis-
criminationdoctrine, feministtheory, andantiracistpolitics. U.Chi.Legal F. (1989),139.
[29] KimberleCrenshaw.1990.Mappingthemargins:Intersectionality,identitypolitics,andviolenceagainstwomenof
color.Sta n.L.R e v . 43(1990),1241.
[30] M. E. David and M. J. Amey. 2020. Critical Race Theory. The SAGE Encyclopedia of Higher Education . SAGE Publica-
tions Ltd.
[31] RichardDelgadoandJeanStefancic.2017.Criticalracetheory:Anintroduction(3rdEd.).NewYorkUniversityPress,
NewYork.
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:27
[32] Jill Fleury DeVoe and Kristen E. Darling-Churchill. 2008. Status and trends in the education of American Indians
and AlaskaNatives.NationalCenter forEducation Statistics.
[33] D.DickersonandT.Zephirin.2017.Exploringtheassociationofaculturalengineeringstudentorganizationchapter
withstudentsuccess exploringtheassociation ofaculturalengineeringstudentorganizationchapterwithstudent
success. AmericanSociety for Engineering Education.
[34] Dinesh D’souza. 1991. Illiberal Education: ThePolitics ofRace and Sex on Campus .Simon andSchuster.
[35] Christina Dunbar-Hester. 2019. If “Diversity” Is the Answer, What Is the Question? Understanding diversity advo-
cacy involuntaristic technology projects. DigitalSTS:Field Guide Sci. Technol.Studies (2019),81–98.
[36] Rachel E. Dwyer, Randy Hodson, and Laura McCloud. 2013. Gender, debt, and dropping out of college. Gender Soc.
27,1(2013),30–55.
[37] Institute for African-American Mentoring in Computing Sciences. 2013. iAAMCS Online Data Collection Portal.
Retrieved from http://iaamcs.wceruw.org/About .
[38] Wisconsin Center for Education Research. 2014. Creating a Computer Science Pipeline for African Americans. Re-
trieved from https://wcer.wisc.edu/news/detail/creating-a-computer-science-pipeline-for-african-americans .
[39] National Center for Education Statistics. 2019. Indicator 26: STEM Degrees. Retrieved from https://nces.ed.gov/
programs/raceindicators/indicator_reg.asp .
[40] National Center for Women & Information Technology. 2020. National Center for Women & Information Technol-
ogy: About Us. Retrievedfrom https://www.ncwit.org/about-us .
[41] National Science Foundation. 1999. Report on the FY’98 Activities of the POWRE Program. Retrieved from https:
//www.nsf.gov/pubs/1999/nsf9939/nsf9939.htm .
[42] National Science Foundation. 2010. NSF Sensational 60. Retrieved from https://www.nsf.gov/about/history/
sensational60.pdf .
[43] NationalScienceFoundation.2015.Computersciencesdegreesawarded,bydegreelevelandsexofrecipient:1966–
2012.Retrievedfrom https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2015/nsf15326/pdf/tab33.pdf .
[44] National Science Foundation. 2020. About the National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES). Re-
trieved from https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/about-ncses.cfm .
[45] National Science Foundation. 2020. Science and Engineering Degrees, by Race and Ethnicity of Recipients: 2008–
2018.Retrievedfrom https://ncsesdata.nsf.gov/sere/2018/index.html#tabs-1 .
[46] Catherine Freeman and Mary Ann Fox. 2005. Status and Trends in the Education of American Indians and Alaska
Natives. NationalCenter forEducation Statistics, U.S. Departmentof Education.
[47] DerekGatherer.2009.The2009H1N1influenzaoutbreakinitshistoricalcontext. J.Clin.Virol. 45,3(2009),174–178.
[48] LisaM. Given.2008. TheSage Encyclopedia ofQualitative Research Methods .SagePublications.
[49] Joanna Goode, Rachel Estrella, and Jane Margolis. 2006. Lost in translation: Gender and high school computer sci-
ence.InWomen and Information Technology:Research on Underrepresentation ,J .M .C o h oo na n dW .A s p r a y( E d s . ) .
[50] Stacie LeSure Gregory. 2015. African American Female Engineering Students’ Persistence in Stereotype-Threatening
Environments:ACritical Race Theory Perspective . Ph.D.Dissertation. Utah StateUniversity.
[51] ChristinaHarrington,YolandaRankin,JasmineJones,RobinBrewer,SheenaErete,TawannaDillahunt,andQuincy
Brown.2020.ACalltoActionfortheACM.Retrievedfrom https://interactions.acm.org/blog/view/a-call-to-action-
for-the-acm .
[52] Roxanne Hughes, Jennifer Schellinger, and Kari Roberts. 2020. The role of recognition in disciplinary identity for
girls.J.Res.Sci. Teach. (2020),1–36. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1002/tea.21665
[53] Black Women in Computing. 2016. Black Women in Computing. Retrieved from http://blackwomenincomputing.
org/.
[54] LatinasinComputing.2020.LatinasinComputingHome. Retrievedfrom http://latinasincomputing.org/ .
[55] David James. 2020. The use of DJing tasks as a pedagogical bridge to learning data structures. In Proceedings of the
2020 ACMConferenceon Innovation andTechnology in Computer Science Education . 193–197.
[56] CalebKaiser.2019.HowKimberlyBryantStartedBlackGirlsCODEWithHer401(k)—AndTaught14,000Girls.Re-
trieved from https://angel.co/blog/how-kimberly-bryant-started-black-girls-code-with-her-401k-and-taught-14 .
[57] Carter Kerk and Stuart Kellogg. 2014. Developing a culture of support for recruitment and retention of American
Indian students.In Proceedings of theIEEEFrontiers in Education Conference(FIE’14) . IEEE, 1–6.
[58] AfifaKhanam,UzmaQuraishi,andHabibaNazir.2016.Astudyofreasonsandimplicationsofthedropoutphenom-
enon inwomenatuniversity. J.Res. Reflect. Edu. 10,2(2016).
[59] XiaojieLiandC.DennisCarroll.2007.Characteristicsofminority-servinginstitutionsandminorityundergraduates
enrolledintheseinstitutions:Postsecondaryeducationdescriptiveanalysisreport(NCES2008-156).NationalCenter
for Education Statistics.
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:28 S. Lunn et al.
[60] Susan M. Lord, Michelle Madsen Camacho, Richard A. Layton, Russell A. Long, Matthew W. Ohland, and Mara H.
Wasburn.2009.Who’spersistinginengineering?AcomparativeanalysisoffemaleandmaleAsian,black,Hispanic,
NativeAmerican,andwhitestudents. J.Women Minorities Sci. Eng. 15,2(2009).
[61] Susan M. Lord, Marisa K. Orr, Matthew W. Ohland, Russell A. Long, Catherine E. Brawner, and Richard A. Lay-
ton. 2017. Engaging with the multiple institution database for investigating engineering longitudinal development
(MIDFIELD):A specialsession. In Proceedings oftheIEEEFrontiersin Education Conference(FIE’17) . IEEE, 1–2.
[62] JaneMargolis andAllanFisher. 2003.Geekmythology. Bull.Sci. Technol.Soc. 23,1(2003),17–20.
[63] MIDFIELD.2015.Indicator 26:STEM Degrees.Retrievedfrom https://engineering.purdue.edu/MIDFIELD .
[64] JoshuaM.Myers.2019. WeAreWorthFightingfor:AHistoryoftheHowardUniversityStudentProtestof1989 .V ol.1.
NYU Press.
[65] NationalCenterforScienceNationalScienceFoundationandEngineeringStatistics.2019.Women,Minorities,and
Persons withDisabilitiesin ScienceandEngineering: 2019.Retrievedfrom www.nsf.gov/statistics/wmpd/ .
[66] Gianluigi Negro. 2017. The global construction of the Chinese Internet 1994–2014. In Proceedings of the GigaNet:
Global InternetGovernanceAcademic Network AnnualSymposium .
[67] Mike Hoa Thai Nguyen. 2019. Building Capacity at Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander Serv-
ing Institutions (AANAPISI): Cultivating Leaders and Civic Engagement through Federal Policy . Ph.D. Dissertation.
UCLA.
[68] TheSocietyofAsianScientistsandEngineers(SASE).2020.AboutSASE.Retrievedfrom https://www.saseconnect.
org/about-sase .
[69] U.S. Department of Education. 2007. The Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System. Retrieved from http:
//nces.ed.gov/ipeds/glossary/index.asp?id=812 .
[70] United States Department of Education. Office of Planning Evaluation and Policy Development. 2016. Advancing
diversity and inclusion in higher education: Key data highlights focusing on race and ethnicity and promising
practices. https://www2.ed.gov/rschstat/research/pubs/advancing-diversity-inclusion.pdf .
[71] U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2020. Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Outlook
Handbook. Retrievedfrom https://www.bls.gov/ooh/ .
[72] TechLatino: The National Association of Latinos in Information Sciences and Technology. 2018. TechLatino: A
technology-focused professionalorganization. Retrievedfrom https://techlatino.org/ .
[73] National Academies of Sciences Engineering, Medicine, et al. 2019. Minority Serving Institutions: America’s Under-
utilized Resource forStrengthening theSTEMWorkforce . NationalAcademiesPress.
[74] Matthew W. Ohland and Russell A. Long. 2016. The multiple-institution database for investigating engineering
longitudinaldevelopment:Anexperientialcasestudy of datasharing andreuse. Adv. Eng.Edu. 5,2(2016),2.
[75] MariaOng,CarolWright,LorelleEspinosa,andGaryOrfield.2011.Insidethedoublebind:Asynthesisofempirical
research on undergraduate and graduate women of color in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
Harvard Edu. Rev. 81,2(2011),172–209.
[76] Charles L. Outcalt and Thomas Edmund Skewes-Cox. 2002. Involvement, interaction, and satisfaction: The human
environmentatHBCUs. Rev. Higher Edu. 25,3(2002),331–347.
[77] JoyPaige.2003. Ellen Ochoa:TheFirstHispanic Woman in Space . Rosen PublishingGroup.
[78] YoonK.Pak,DinaC.Maramba,andXavierJ.Hernandez.2014. AsianAmericansinHigherEducation:ChartingNew
Realities: AEHEVolume40, Number 1 . John Wiley& Sons.
[79] RobertT.Palmer,DeShawnPreston,andAmandaAssalone.2019. ExaminingEffectivePractices atMinority-Serving
Institutions:Beyond a Deficit Framing ofLeadership .Springer.
[80] Hispanic Technology & Telecommunications Partnership. 2020. About HTTP. Retrieved from https://www.
httppolicy.org/mission-index-impact .
[81] Jane Chu Prey, Yan Timanovsky, Jodi L. Tims, and Stuart Zweben. 2013. ACM NDC study: A new annual study of
non-doctoral-granting departmentsincomputing. ACM Inroads 4,3(2013),4–14.
[82] Farzana Rahman, Elodie Billionniere, Quincy Brown, and Ann Quiroz Gates. 2020. RESET (re-enter STEM through
emerging technology) finding re-entry pathways for women. In Proceedings of the 51st ACM Technical Symposium
on ComputerScience Education . 173–174.
[83] Yolanda A. Rankin and Jakita O. Thomas. 2020. The intersectional experiences of black women in computing. In
Proceedings of the51stACMTechnical Symposium on Computer Science Education . 199–205.
[84] Renata Alejandra Revelo Alonso. 2015. Engineering Familia: The Role of a Professional Organization in the Devel-
opment of Engineering Identities of Latina/o Undergraduates . Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign.
[85] SarahL.RodriguezandKathleenLehman.2017.Developingthenextgenerationofdiversecomputerscientists:The
needfor enhanced,intersectional computingidentitytheory. Comput. Sci. Edu. 27,3–4 (2017),229–247.
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.Exploration of Intersectionality and Computer Science Demographics 10:29
[86] Monique Ross, Zahra Hazari, Gerhard Sonnert, and Philip Sadler. 2020. The intersection of being black and being
a woman: Examining the effect of social computing relationships on computer science career choice. ACM Trans.
Comput. Edu. 20,2(2020),1–15.
[87] MoniqueS.RossandSusanMcGrade.2016.Anexplorationintotheimpactsofthenationalsocietyofblackengineers
(NSBE) on studentpersistence. AmericanSociety forEngineering Education.
[88] MargaretW. Rossiter. 2012. Women Scientists in America: Forging a NewWorldSince 1972 . Vol. 3. JHU Press.
[89] Linda J. Sax, Kari L. George, Daniel Harris, and Fay Cobb Payton. 2020. Reframing the representation of black
students in undergraduatecomputing. J.Women Minorities Sci. Eng. 26,4(2020).
[90] Anne Schraff. 2010. EllenOchoa:Astronaut andInventor .Enslow Publishing, LLC.
[91] she++. 2019.she++. Retrievedfrom http://www.sheplusplus.com/ .
[92] Hong Shen. 2016. China and global internet governance: Toward an alternative analytical framework. Chinese J.
Commun. 9,3(2016),304–324.
[93] DanielR.SmithandDavidF.Ayers.2006.Culturallyresponsivepedagogyandonlinelearning:Implicationsforthe
globalizedcommunitycollege. Community CollegeJ.Res.Pract. 30,5–6 (2006),401–415.
[94] AmberSolomon,DeKitaMoon,ArmishaL.Roberts,andJuanE.Gilbert.2018.Notjustblackandnotjustawoman:
Blackwomenbelongingincomputing.In ProceedingsoftheConferenceonResearchonEquityandSustainedPartici-
pation in Engineering, Computing, and Technology(RESPECT’18) . IEEE, 1–5.
[95] C. Stephenson, A. Derbenwick Miller, C. Alvarado, L. Barker, V. Barr, T. Camp, C. Frieze, C. Lewis, E. Cannon
Mindell, L. Limbird, D. Richardson, M. Sahami, E. Villa, H. Walker, and S. Zweben. 2018. Retention in computer
science undergraduateprograms inthe U.S.: Datachallengesandpromisinginterventions. ACM, New York, NY.
[96] TerrellL.Strayhorn,MelvinC.Terrell,JaneS.Redmond,andChutneyN.Walton.2012.Ahomeawayfromhome.In
BlackCulturalCentersasSupportingEnvironmentsforAfricanAmericanCollegiansatWhiteInstitutions.Theevolving
challenges of black college students: New insights for policy, practice, and research , T. L. Strayhorn and M. C. Terrell
(Eds.). 122–137.
[97] ReginaldStuart. 2012.Collegebound. DiverseIssues Higher Edu. 29,21(2012),14.
[98] LatinxTech Summit.2020.LatinxTech Summit.Retrievedfrom https://www.latinxtechsummit.org/home .
[99] MohsenTaheri,MoniqueS.Ross,ZahraHazari,MarkAllenWeiss,MichaelGeorgiopoulos,KenChristensen,Tiana
Solis, Deepa Chari, and Zahra Taheri. 2019. Exploring computing identity and persistence across multiple groups
using structural equation modeling. In Proceedings of the American Society for Engineering Education Conference
(ASEE’19) . AmericanSociety for EngineeringEducation.
[100] Yu Tao. 2010. Multiple disadvantages? The earnings of Asian women computer scientists in the United States. Int.
J.Gender Sci. Technol. 2,2(2010).
[101] JakitaO.Thomas,NicoleJoseph,ArianWilliams,JamikaBurge,etal.2018.Speakingtruthtopower:Exploringthe
intersectional experiences of Black women in computing. In Proceedings of the Research on Equity and Sustained
Participation in Engineering, Computing, andTechnology (RESPECT’18) .IEEE, 1–8.
[102] DeLean Tolbert and Monica E. Cardella. 2016. Engineer of 2020 attributes and the black male future engineer: A
review of literature.In Proceedings of theASEEAnnual Conference& Exposition .
[103] Gloria Childress Townsend and Kay Sloan. 2015. An effective alternative to the Grace Hopper Celebration. In Pro-
ceedings ofthe46th ACMTechnical Symposium on ComputerScience Education . 197–202.
[104] EileenM.Trauth,CurtisC.Cain,KshitiD.Joshi,LynetteKvasny,andKaylaBooth.2012.Embracingintersectionality
in gender and IT career choice research. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Conference on Computers and People
Research. 199–212.
[105] Niels van Huizen, Puck Kemper, Mariëlle Stoelinga, Alma Schaafstal, Marieke Huisman, and Sophie Lathouwers.
2020. Alice & Eve: A celebration of women in computing. https://research.utwente.nl/en/publications/alice-amp-
eve-a-celebration-of-women-in-computing .
[106] RoliVarma.2007.Decodingthefemaleexodusfromcomputingeducation. Info.Commun.Soc. 10,2(2007),181–193.
[107] RoliVarma.2009.Bridgingthedigitaldivide:Computingintribalcollegesanduniversities. J.WomenMinoritiesSci.
Eng.15,1 (2009).
[108] Roli Varma.2009.AttractingNativeAmericans tocomputing. Commun. ACM 52,8(2009),137–140.
[109] Roli Varma. 2010. Why so few women enroll in computing? Gender and ethnic differences in students’ perception.
Comput. Sci. Edu. 20,4 (2010),301–316.
[110] Telle Whitney, Denise Gammal, Barbara Gee, Jody Mahoney, and Caroline Simard. 2013. Priming the pipeline: Ad-
dressing gender-basedbarriers in computing. Computer 46,3(2013),30–36.
[111] Demere G. Woolway, C. Conrad, and M. Gasman. 2015. Educating a Diverse Nation: Lessons From Minority-Serving
Institutions .Harvard University Press, Cambridge,MA, 295pp.
[112] Leila Zahedi, Hossein Ebrahiminejad, Monique S. Ross, Matthew W. Ohland, and Stephanie J. Lunn. 2021. Multi-
institution study of student demographics and stickiness of computing majors in the USA. In Proceedings of the
CollaborativeNetwork for Engineering and Computing Diversity (CoNECD’21) .
ACM Transactions onComputingEducation, Vol. 21,No.2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.10:30 S. Lunn et al.
[113] Stuart Zweben, Jodi Tims, and Yan Timanovsky. 2019. ACM-NDC study 2018–2019: Seventh annual study of non-
doctoral-granting departmentsin computing. ACM Inroads 10,3 (2019),40–54.
[114] Stuart H. Zweben and Elizabeth B. Bizot. 2015. Representation of women in postsecondary computing 1990–2013:
Disciplines,institutional,andindividualcharacteristicsmatter.In ProceedingsoftheResearchinEquityandSustained
Participation in Engineering, Computing, and Technology(RESPECT’15) . IEEE, 1–8.
Received July 2020; revised October 2020; accepted December 2020
ACM Transactions on ComputingEducation,Vol. 21,No. 2,Article 10.Publicationdate:March 2021.