Toward Distributed Key Management for Offline Authentication
Self-Sovereign Identity using Intermediate Certificates
Gregory Linklater
Rhodes University
Grahamstown, South Africa
g12l4025@campus.ru.ac.za
greg@strangerlabs.ioChristian Smith
Stranger Labs
Cambridge, MA, USA
christian@strangerlabs.io
Alan Herbert
Rhodes University
Grahamstown, South Africa
a.herbert@ru.ac.zaBarry Irwin
Rhodes University
Grahamstown, South Africa
b.irwin@ru.ac.za
ABSTRACT
Self-sovereign identity promises prospective users greater control,
security, privacy, portability and overall greater convenience; how-
evertheimmaturityofcurrentdistributedkeymanagementsolu-
tionsresults ingeneraldisregard ofsecurityadvisoriesinfavour
of convenience and accessibility. This research proposes the use of
intermediate certificates as a distributed key management solution.
Intermediate certificates will be shown to allow multiple keys to
authenticate to a single self-sovereign identity. Keys may be freely
added to an identity without requiring a distributed ledger, any
otherthird-partyserviceorsharingprivatekeysbetweendevices.
This research will also show that key rotation is a superior alterna-
tivetoexistingkeyrecoveryandescrowsystemsinhelpingusers
recoverwhentheirkeysarelostorcompromised.Thesefeatures
willallowremotecredentialstobeusedtoissuer,presentandap-
praiseremoteattestations,withoutrelyingonaconstantInternet
connection.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Securityandprivacy →Keymanagement ;Digitalsignatures ;
Authentication; Distributed systems security;
KEYWORDS
Trust;Assertion;RemoteAttestation;CryptographicProtocols;Dis-
tributed Key Management
ACM Reference Format:
GregoryLinklater,ChristianSmith,AlanHerbert,andBarryIrwin.2018.To-
wardDistributedKeyManagementforOfflineAuthentication:Self-Sovereign
IdentityusingIntermediateCertificates.In 2018AnnualConferenceofthe
South African Institute of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
onthe firstpage.Copyrights forcomponentsof thisworkowned byothersthan the
author(s)mustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,or
republish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SAICSIT ’18, September 26–28, 2018, Port Elizabeth, South Africa
©2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to the
Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6647-2/18/09...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3278681.3278683(SAICSIT’18),September26–28,2018,PortElizabeth,SouthAfrica. ACM,New
York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3278681.3278683
1 INTRODUCTION
According to Allen [2], Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) is the latest
intheevolutionarychainofidentitytechniques.SSIpromisesan
improvement on current infrastructure by prioritising user control,
the convenienceof portability, and security.
WhileSSIcouldofferasolutiontoanumberofproblemsrelated
toprivacyandtrustaswellasageneralimprovementtothecurrent
identityinfrastructureoftheInternet,SSIisnotpossiblewithout
aviabledistributedkeymanagementsystem(DKMS).Currentat-
temptsatcreatingapracticalimplementationofSSIfromSovrin
[37], DigitalBazaar [ 11] anduPort [ 7] failto provide solutionsthat
are truly self-sovereign. While these attempts have no single en-
tity that has autonomous control, they still rely on a network of
pseudonymouspeerstomaintainalogicallycentralized[ 8]registry
for identities. Distributed ledgers are inefficient by design and the
reliance on them, albeit distributed and resistant to individual con-
trol, brings into question the decentralization and self-sovereignty
of these solutions.
Aself-sovereign identitymustnot relyon anythingotherthan
the subject’s device in order to operate. Like current identification
methods,suchasanationalIDordriver’slicense,theidentitymust
be able to function and be validated using only what is present
atthetimeofappraisal.Furthermore,thedigitalcredentialsmust
work across all of the user’s devices. In a networked world, asking
userstoonlyauthenticatefromoneoftheirdevices,ortoonlyhave
accesstoasubsetoftheirattestationsandcapabilitiesonanyone
device, is inconvenient and unreasonable.
This research describes how intermediate certificates may be
usedtoenablekeyrotationbehindaself-signedpersonalcertificate
authority(CA)ordeclarationofself-sovereignty(DSS).Itwillbe
shown that intermediate certificates allow multiple key pairs toauthenticate to a single identity. Keys may be freely added to an
identity without requiring a centralized registry or anything more
than what they have created themselves. This research will alsoshow that key rotation is a superior alternative to existing key
recoveryandescrow systemsinhelpingusersrecoverwhentheir
keys are lost or compromised.
10SAICSIT ’18, September 26–28, 2018, Port Elizabeth, South Africa G. Linklater et al.
Figure 1: Certificate Profile
Theremainderofthisdocumentisstructuredinthefollowing
manner:
•Section 2 reviews considerations for the certificate profile
used in this research.
•Section 3 reviews existing key management systems such
asDID, X.509,andthe federalPIVstandard aswell astheir
importanceandcontributionto this research.
•Section4detailstheprofileandoperationofthecertificate
graphdatastructure.
•Section5describesthescenarioandsetofassumptionsunder
whichthe certificategraphdata structure is tested.
•Section6discussestheresultsofthecertificategraphtesting
and theimplicationsof its use.
•Section 7discussesthe analysisof Section6 andenumerates
conclusions that may be drawn from this research. This
section also discusses potential future work arising from
considerationsarementionedbutcouldnotbefullyexplored
in this document.
2 CREDENTIALS AND REMOTE
ATTESTATION
AccordingtoCokeretal .[10]aremoteattestationis “theactivityof
making a claim about properties of a target [or subject] by supplying
evidence to an appraiser over a network”. Although their discussion
ofremoteattestationisdoneinthecontextofidentityproviders,
such as SAML [ 16] and OpenID Connect [ 32], their principles still
apply:
(1)Fresh information Assertionsshouldreflect currentstate.
Ifthetruthofanassertionchangesbeforeexpiry,thenthe
assertionshould be revoked.
(2)Comprehensiveinformation Comprehensiveinformation
aboutthesubjectshouldbeavailabletobedisclosed,however
each disclosure should be kept to the minimum necessary
personal data.
(3)Constraineddisclosure Thesubjectofattestationsshould
have full governance over which measurements are sent to
whichappraisers.
(4)Semanticexplicitness Thecontentofattestationsshould
explicitlybepresentedinalogicalformsoastobeusedas
evidence to satisfy access control policies.(5)Trustworthymechanism Appraisers should be presented
withevidenceofthetrustworthinessoftheattestationmech-
anism.
Asidefromtheseprinciples,Cokeretal .[10]alsosupplycompre-
hensivedefinitionsfor: trust,rootoftrust(ortrustanchor),attestation,
appraiser andmeasurement.
The purpose of a certificate is to contain information that is
beingattestedto.InthecaseofX.509(discussedfurtheraheadin
Section3),theattestationisforthebindingbetweenapublickey
and a subject identified by the FQDN. This research makes use of a
genericcertificateprofileasavehicletoprotecttheintegrityand
ensure the non-repudiation of attestations.
The purpose of the certificate is to contain four classes of infor-
mation: attestations, capabilities, metadata and policy. These are
now described:
•Attestationsarestatementsoffactthatarebeingassertedby
theissuer of the certificate.
•Capabilities are a kind of attestation that expresses the priv-
ileges of the subject to execute a set of actions for a set of
resources and are a form of discretionary access control. Ca-
pabilitiesarebasedontheprinciplesofObjectCapabilities
[28].
•Metadata refers to other fields that are standard across all
certificates.Everycertificatewillincludethefollowingmeta-
data: references to both the issuer and the subject, a validityperiod, and a version number; some may also contain a pub-
lic key associated with the subject and revocation status
information.
•Policyreferstoinformationthatdetailsthetermsofuseof
attestations, restriction in their legal propagation and theconditions and limitations of the capabilities contained in
thecertificate.
The contents of a certificate arose from examining existing cer-
tification methods (see [ 18,21–23,27,29]). The collection of the
requirementsforthecontentofacertificateissummarisedinthe
design of the certificate profile used for this research, which is
shown in Figure 1.
Attestationsmustnecessarilyconformtosomestandardschema
toenabletheautomateddecisionmakingintheirvalidation.Alimi-tationofcurrentattribute-basedaccesscontrol(ABAC)mechanisms
isthelackofavailabilityoftrustworthyattributesorattestations
in a monolithic architecture. According to Hu et al . [19], ABAC
rulesarefunctionallycompleteandthereforehavenoupperlimit
totheircomplexity;anyhypotheticalaccesscontrolscenariomay
bedescribedasarulesolongastherearetrustworthysourcesofat-
tributesto supportthem [ 26].By makingthe formatofattestations
predictable, it enables their use – from multiple sources – as input
to ABAC rules. Attestation schema standardisation helps raise the
upperlimitofcomplexityofABACrulesasmoreattestationsbe-
comeavailable,howeverstandardisationisaslowprocessandmay
also dampen progress and creativity in the use of attestations.
As humans change, so will the nature of the facts that are at-
testedto;therefore,itisnotpossibletopredictthedifferentkindsof
attestations that will be made. To account for the rapid adaptation,
while still maintaining some degree of standardisation across attes-
tations,issuersmustprovidetheschematowhichtheirattestations
11Toward Distributed Key Management for Offline Authentication SAICSIT ’18, September 26–28, 2018, Port Elizabeth, South Africa
conform.Linklateretal .[26]recommendJSONSchemaasafunc-
tionallycompleteschemadefinitionandvalidationlanguageforuse
indefiningattestationschemas.Anyissuermaydefineandpublish
their own attestation schemas, in-line with the attestation data, or
they may reference schemas defined by others – ones that are pre-
sumablymorestandardised.Asattestationschemasmaybedefined
withindeterminatecomplexity,itisnolongernecessarytoattempt
topredicttheattestationsofthefutureastheirevaluationwillbe
supported. This will simultaneously enable rapid development and
experimentation for small deployments, and global standardisation
foruniversallyunderstood certification concepts.
Thisresearchisfocusedprimarilyontheemergentproperties
andapplicationofkeyrotationforauthentication.Whilethepur-
poseofcertificatesisthetransportofattestedinformationinthis
way, this research is specifically interested in the authentication
of the certificate itself, rather than its contents. For this reason,
theevaluationandappraisalofthecontentsofthecertificatenot
relatedtoitsauthenticationarenotconsideredfurther–otherthan
beingthereasonforthisresearch–andwillbebetterexploredina
future work.
3 DISTRIBUTED KEY MANAGEMENT
SYSTEMS
Authentication and identification of distinct users has been an
area of constant investigation. Most recently, SSI has been the
subject of discussion among the members of the W3C Credentials
CommunityGroup(CCG)1andtheDigitalVerificationCommunity
Group (DVCG)2, where there is a large overlap in membership.
The current hindrance for SSI becoming widely adopted is the
immaturityof DKMS.
TheuseofPKIforidentificationinremoteattestationshashad
somesuccessinencouragingthedecentralizationofauthentication.
This can be seen in federated identity protocols, as used by univer-
sities,andmorerecentlydiscussedinrelationtoSSI.PKIenables
self-sovereignty in identification because anyone can generate anew key pair for themselves and authenticate directly to an ap-
praiser as the controller of that key pair, without relying on any
third party service. This feature of PKI, called non-repudiation, has
been used in many distributed systems and peer-to-peer networks
sinceits discovery.
The most notable, recent use of the non-repudiation of PKI in a
peer-to-peernetworkisindistributedledgertechnologies(DLT).
Cryptocurrenciesbuilt usingDLTs withconsensusalgorithms for
Byzantinefault-tolerance[ 24],suchasBitcoin,usePKItodistin-
guishand control accounts on the ledger. Accounts are created by
generating a new key where after the currency is transferred to an
account,viatheledger,byreferencingthehashofthepublickey.
No authorization is required to receive funds whereas all outgoing
transactionsontheaccountmustbeauthorizedbythecontrollerof
the corresponding private key. While the ledger and network itself
become the centralized “registry” to which the user authenticates
to validate transactions, the creation of the credentials themselves
1https://www.w3.org/community/credentials/
2https://www.w3.org/community/digital-verification/.TheDVCGhassincesuccess-
fullyproposedtheirartifact[ 35]totheW3CforpromotiontoaWorkingGroupandis
pending consensus for standardisation.is still “self-sovereign” and could be used for authentication and
validationoutsideof the ledger.
TheaboveillustratestheimportanceofPKIforSSI,howevereven
in the relatively simple case of DLTs, there are many opportunities
for failure due to the human element. The practice of network and
information security3revolves around securing systems against
knownattacks,detectingunusualbehaviorandmitigatingthedam-
agewhenoneor more systems are compromised.
Key management is not a new problem [ 4,33]. Losing access
to– and control of– precious data when private keys are lost or
compromised is a reality that has prompted much thought on how
to mitigate it:
(1) Never transmit a private key over a network.(2) Do not reuse the same keys for different applications.
(3)
Themoreakeyisused,thegreaterthechancethatitwillbe
compromised.
(4)The more a key is used, the greater the loss when it is com-
promised.
(5)The more a key is used, the greater the temptation for an
attackerto spend the effort necessary to break it.
(6)The more a key is used, the easier the encryption will be to
break.
(7)If a key is transmitted over a network (private or not), it
must be assumed that the key may have been compromised;
even if encrypted.
(8)If it is suspected that a key may have been lost or compro-
mised, then it must treated as if it has been compromised.
(9)If a key is lost, it must be treated as if it has been compro-
mised.
(10)If a key is compromised, then it must be revoked as soon as
possible.
(11) Importantkeys must be backed up securely.
These procedures and advice are not optimal, however they are
currently the best possible ways to prevent loss arising from alost or compromised key. One solution to key loss is key escrow
[33],howeverthisisshownbyAbelsonetal .[1]toproducemore
problems than solutions. Keys are sensitive – private keys most of
all – and should be protected above all else [33].
Application of these are known to mitigate the risks of losing
access to– or control of– key material [ 13], however all of them
require key management that is difficult to understand for non-
specialist users. Due to the impact it has on the availability of data,
most are ignored. Users tend to want additional security measures,
however most would rather go without if it compromises conve-
nience[34].Betterkeymanagement,andthereforesecurity,forSSI
can be achieved if DKMS are sufficiently automated to be easy and
convenientenoughfor useby average users.
DKMS are intended to make key management for individuals
andotherentitiesviablewhilestillmaintainingthepropertiesofSSI
described by Allen [2]. In particular, DKMS must not be controlled
orcontrollablebyanyoneotherthantheownerandshouldnotrely
on any services other than those installed on the owner’s devices.
Fullutilitymustbemaintainedacrossalloftheowner’sdevices–of
3Forthesakeofbrevity,thephysicalsecurityofhardwareagainstriskssuchasfire
and natural disasters is not considered.
12SAICSIT ’18, September 26–28, 2018, Port Elizabeth, South Africa G. Linklater et al.
which there may be any number, and their connectivity cannot be
guaranteed. Some proposed solutions to DKMS are now discussed.
Decentralized Identifiers (DID) is a work-in-progress stan-
dard being proposed by Reed et al . [29]of the W3C-CCG. The
standard itself details the profile of a self-sovereign identity cer-
tificate,calledaDIDDocument,theprimaryfunctionofwhichis
to bind any number of credentials listed in the document to the
DIDitself,whichisakindofURN[ 31].Theprimarybenefitthat
applicationsoftheDIDstandardoffer,fromtheperspectiveofboth
securityandconvenience,istheabilitytodokeyrotation.While
not hierarchical like X.509, this form of binding a key pair to an
identifier performs a similar function. With key rotation, keys may
be freely added and removed from the DID Document without
affectingtheuseoftheotherkeys.TheDIDownermaygenerate
a new key pair for each of his devices. Once the public key has
been recorded as a valid credential in the DID Document, the DID
ownermayinteractwithothersusingthenewlygeneratedkeypairandbeauthenticatedastheowneroftheDID.ThisfeatureofDIDs
means that private keys never need be transferred from one device
to another and if the device is lost or destroyed the corresponding
key can be removed from the DID document and subsequently
replaced.
DIDsworkwellintheory,howevertheyrelyonsomemechanism
to resolve the DID URN for a DID Document to acquire service
metadataandpublickeysforauthentication.Implementationsof
DID methods such as the Sovrin [ 37] and Veres One [ 36] ledgers
requireconnectivitytoanodeontheirnetworkswithafullcopyof
the distributed ledger to do this resolution. This restricts their use
tonetworkswherethereisarecentcopyoftheledgeravailable,and
therefore brings into question these methods’ “self-sovereignty”.
There are a number of privacy concerns related to DLTs in iden-
tity applications. The wide publication of an identifier, even ifpseudonymous such as a DID, exposes the identifier to anyone
who knows to look for it. Malicious appraisers could collude to
build a detailed profile of the victim using information from all
threebycorrelatingthedataontheidentifier.Pairwiseidentifiers
do little to solve the problem if they are also published in a DID
Document; if not the identifier then other credentialsshared with
appraisersmay becorrelated. Eagleand Pentland [12]demonstrate
that correlation of pseudonymous messages and their recipients
can be used to reveal the identity of pseudonymous users, without
revealing the contents of the message.
Additionally,the GeneralDataProtectionRegulation (GDPR)of
the EU enshrines the rights of rectification and erasure, among
others[38].Therighttorectificationstatesthatindividualshave
the right to have their personal data corrected, if incorrect. The
righttoerasurestatesthatindividualsmayrequestthattheirper-
sonaldatabedeletedfromthesystemsoftherecipient.DLTsare
immutabledata structures;to maintainthe integrity ofthe ledger,
no transactions may ever be deleted. While further transactions
maybe published to correct data in thecurrent state of the ledger,
the original incorrect information will always remain as part ofa previous state. This makes compliance to the right to erasure
practicallyimpossible.
DIDs were designed to assume the presence of some external
system; whether that is a distributed ledger or a web service, their
utility is limited by this assumption. Despite this, DID makes a
Figure 2: X.509 Certificate Chain
significant contribution to DKMS by proposing key rotation as an
alternative to key recovery.
X.509(formerly CCITT X.509) or ISO/IEC/ITU 9594-8 was first
published ( v1) in 1988 as part of the X.500 Directory recommen-
dationsanddefinesastandardcertificateformat[ 17].Forthelast
30 years X.509 has been synonymous with the word certificate
itself, and is used where ever there is a need to certify a public key.
Their most prominent use is in web browsers with transport layer
security (TLS) [ 30], where certificate authorities (CA) certify the
observed key pair to belong to the domain that it claims to.
X.509isahierarchicalcertificatestructurewhichisdemonstrated
by Figure 2. The origin point for the authority associated with acertificate is the Root CA Certificate (bottom right). The root cer-
tificate is a self-signed declaration of authority within the domain
of the CA that individuals and browser certificate curators mustmake an active decision to trust. To prevent man-in-the-middle
attacks,rootcertificatesmustbedistributedtoappraisersusinga
differentcommunicationchannel;usuallythisispreemptivelydone
by distributing CA certificates as part of browser applications or
operating systems. Owing to the complexity and slow propagation
times associated with replacing these certificates, it is necessaryfor root certificates distributed in this manner to be long-lived;
however this must be balanced against the frequency of their use.
The security provided by both PKI and encryption is ephemeral;
the more a symmetric or asymmetric key is used, the more datais available to cryptanalysts [
33]. Thus X.509 and TLS use root
certificates to issue intermediate CA certificates that are muchshorter-lived, and therefore able to be more frequently used. In-
termediatecertificatesmaybe created in a hierarchy with a depth
ofoneormore,withaprogressivelyhigherfrequencyofuseand
shorter validity period at each level. The certificate depicted in the
center of Figure 2 is one such intermediate certificate. Many inter-
mediatecertificatesmaybeissued,rotatedandrevokedoveralong
period of time to distribute the frequency of use of each certificate;
this satisfies the need to balance of length of the certificate validity
period with the frequency of use.
Whenthedomainowner’scertificateortheend-usercertificateis
presentedtoanappraisertobeverifiedandvalidated,itispresented
withtheentirecertificatechainleading backtothetrustanchor’s
rootcertificateandmaybeappraisedwithoutanetworkconnection.
13Toward Distributed Key Management for Offline Authentication SAICSIT ’18, September 26–28, 2018, Port Elizabeth, South Africa
Thealgorithmusedtovalidateacertificatechainisreferredtointhe
X.509 specifications as a certificate path validation algorithm [ 18].
X.509[18]detailsanexampleofasimplecertificatepathvalidation
algorithm that can be used to validate a particular certificate chain,
whichdoesnotexplicitlyrequireanynetworkconnectivityormake
anyout-of-bandrequests.TheX.509basicpathvalidationalgorithm
requires the entire certificate path and reports it’s validity based
on the assumption that the trust anchor’s certificate came froma trustworthy source (i.e. the OS). The only action that requires
network connectivity is downloading and checking the certificate
revocation list (CRL) for revocations made by the issuer or owner;
all otheractionsare possible offline.
Contrary to unsubstantiated reports that X.509 is “rapidly dy-
ing”[6],X.509certificatesarestillinincreasinglywideuse.Core
Internet technologies and protocols, such as TLS v1.3[30], are
beingupdatedtostillinclude X.509certificates,withnosuccessor
or replacement considered. Other recent uses of X.509 certificates
includeIdPssuchasShibboleth,animplementationoftheSAML
standard [ 16], where certificates are used for establishing trust
relationships between federating identity providers.
TLS,X.509,andthelargersystemthatsupportstheCAmodel
of trust on the Internet is a decentralized system. While individual
CAsthemselvesarecentralizedbusinessesandentities,thereare
many available for individuals to choose from. There is no central
repositoryorauthorityovereveryCAasidefromthelegalauthority
wheretheCAoperates.WhenreferringtothewiderCAsystem,as
opposed to an individual CA, they are not politically centralized.One CA need not regularly communicate with another in order
to operate. Each CA operates freely from the others without over-
lappingarchitectureorsystems.WhenreferringtothewiderCA
system,theyarenot architecturallyorlogicallycentralized.X.509
certificatesareonlycentralizedwhentheirapplicationinvolvesa
central registry. CA’s are centralized when considered alone but
demonstrate theirdecentralization whenconsidered as agroup of
interoperable systems.
AcommoncriticismofCAsisthattheyrepresentacentralization
ofauthority[ 3].ThefearisthatCA’saremoreeasilycorruptible,
being centralized organisations. The implications of just one CA
certificatebeingcompromisedwouldhavedisastrouseffectsonthe
Internet [ 33]. There is merit in the concern that CAs are more eas-
ilycorruptibleindividuallywhencomparedto distributedledgers;
however,proposalsbyAllenetal .[3]andFromknechtetal .[14]to
replacetraditionalCA’swithdistributedledgersdosoatthecost
of efficiency on the network.
TherearestillproblemswithX.509andtheCAmodeloftrust.
ASN.1[20],theschemadefinitionlanguageusedtoencodeX.509
certificates, can be ambiguous. The basic identification fields ofan X.509 certificate, such as the subject name and FQDN, make
assumptions about the purpose of the certificate and the owner of
thecertificatewantingtobindanentitytothatcertificate.Riskof
CA corruption may be mitigated by increasing the number of root
CAs and therefore the distribution of certification; the less a key is
used,thelessattractiveitistoattackers[ 33].CAsalsostilllacka
moresophisticatedmethodofcommunicatingcertificaterevocationinformationthancertificaterevocationlists[
18],howeverattempts
toimproveareunderway[ 25].Althoughtheseproblemsexist,X.509has successfully been used for the last thirty years and contributes
tothisresearchbyprovidingastartingpointforacertificateprofile.
Personal Identity Verification (PIV) is the current standard
for distributedidentification acrossthe federalgovernment of the
USA[15].Thestandarddeclares anumberof processes,including
the issuance and operation of the PIV cards. The PIV cards areprimarily a means of proving the identity and privileges of the
subject, both in their own agencies and in others, without the need
fortheircredentialstobeexplicitlyconfirmed.PIVdemonstrates
howonemayuseahierarchicalcertificatestructuretocreatecre-
dentials that may be automatically and deterministically appraised
offline. The decision to trust the credentials is based on the output
oftheirautomatedappraisalandtheconsciousdecisiontotrustthe
presented trust anchor.
PIVcards usea similarcertificatehierarchy asX.509,described
above. A root certificate is created by a higher government author-
ity and an intermediate certificate is created and signed for each
agency. Theresponsibility tofollowthe procedureswhenissuing
credentialstoindividualslieswitheachagency,astheyusetheir
certificate to issue PIV cards to individuals. The subject of a PIVcard can authenticate themselves to members of other agencies
owing to the shared root certificate. As their own credentials origi-
natefromthesamecertificate,theyareabletoverifythepresentedcredentialswiththesamerootcertificateasthetrustanchor.While
all authority of PIV cards originates from one point, the system
itself and the appraisal of credentials is both logically and archi-
tecturally decentralized because there is no reliance on a remote
central registry.
Summary These technologies, DID, X.509 and PIV, each con-
tribute to the design and use of intermediate certificates that is
described ahead in Section 4. DID, while flawedin its various exe-
cutions, introduces the idea of key rotation as an alternative to key
recovery. X.509 shows the decentralized capabilities of certificates
anddemonstratestheutilityandpositivesecurityimplicationsofus-ingintermediatecertificatesforCAs.PIVprovidesfurtherevidence
and support for certificates alone being sufficient for decentralized
identity, without the need for a network connection. PIV is also
anexampleoftheprincipleexaminedbythisresearchbeingsuc-
cessfullyapplied.Thesetechnologiesprovideasolidfoundationoff
whichto base further advancement.
4 DATA STRUCTURE
Section3describesanumberofproblemswithaverageusersusing
PKI foridentityas well assome potential solutions. Thisresearch
proposes the certificate graph as a data structure that will allow
appraiserstovalidatethecompleteprovenanceofinformationlead-
ing back to the trust anchor. The user experience problems with
PKIanddisregardofstandardsecuritypracticesareaddressedby
makingkeysreplaceableusingkeyrotationandimprovingthecon-
venience of compliance to security directives. The design of the
certificate graph that is discussed hereafter will satisfy the goals of
this research that are described in Section 1.
The certificate graph and its functions are described in three
parts. The first is how a certificate may be used to create Decla-rations of Self-Sovereignty (DSS) and Declarations of Authority
(DA).Thesecondisthebasicalgorithmfortheappraisalofthedata
14SAICSIT ’18, September 26–28, 2018, Port Elizabeth, South Africa G. Linklater et al.
Figure 3: Certificate Graph
structure. Last is the hierarchical intermediate certificate structure
and how it may be applied to preempt known security problems in
DKMS.
4.1 CertificateGraph
While the data structure itself is a graph, the storage thereof is
accomplishedthroughmoretraditionalmeans.Certificatesrefer-
enceeachotherusingthehashoftheirsignatureinput,hereafter
referredtoasa reference.Thegraphdatastructureisasimplearray
ofcertificatesandisorderedbythereferenceforefficientlookup.
The graph also records the reference of the head of the graph as
the entry point for traversing the data structure. The certificate
graph, the certificates contained within and all inputs to signature
andhashingfunctionsareencodedwithCBOR[ 5].Toensurethe
correctness of inputs to the signature and hashing functions, all
properties are ordered lexicographically when CBOR encoded. The
functionalityof certificate graphs is now described.
4.2 Self-Sovereignty and Authority
Key pairs may be freely generated, and can be used to authenticate
oneself without relying on a third party [ 34]; it follows that this
propertyofPKIenablesself-sovereignty.Thecertificationprofile
described above is primarily a way to protect the integrity of meta-
dataandassertionsassociatedwiththekeypair,suchasthevalidity
period, and to provide a known value and signature to compare
againstwhenauthenticating.Byself-signingacertificate,anyob-
server of the certificate may independently verify that the data
containedwithinthecertificateoriginatedfromthecontrollerof
the correspondingprivatekey of the certificate.
The DSS is a self-signed certificate that becomes the root CA
and trust anchor for the new identity that may be authenticated by
thepublickeycontainedwithin.LikeallCAs,therootcertificate
must define the domain of their authority. For most individuals the
domainthatwillbedefinedissimplyauthorityoverthecertificated
identity.
Other entities and organisations, such as a university, might
additionally create further self-signed DA attestations declaring
themselves an authority within a particular domain. Like a DSS, a
DAisasimpleattestationthatmaybeincludedinacertificate.Asa
DAisadeclaration,theyshouldonlybeincludedincertificatesthat
areself-signed.CertificatescontainingaDAmayeitheralsocontaina DSS and a public key, or may reference another certificate that
containsaDSSasthesubjectoftheofDAcertificate.Figure3shows
a certificate graph that demonstrates the relationship between the
DA, the DSS and the certificate path to the head certificate. The
right-most green certificate (marked as b) shows Faythe’s DA over
adomainthateventuallyallowsAlicetoissueFranktheattestation
(marked as c). A DSS is similar to a DA in that it declares authority
over only a single key pair. Any additional assertions may be made
within a DA, such as a name, and additional capabilities, such as
theabilitytoissuequalifications.Anyoneiscapableofcreatingandself-signingaDA;caremustbetakenbyappraiserstoevaluateand
decide if the DA being presented is trustworthy.
DSS’ created in this manner are a special case. As the subject
has generated the key pair that is being declared self-sovereign
and only the holder of the private key can authenticate to it, there
is nobody more qualified to issue an identity certificate than thesubject themselves. All of the purple certificates in Figure 3 areDSS’, including that of the trust anchor’s (marked as
a). There is
noreasontodistrustaDSSthatwassuccessfullyauthenticated–
unless there exists a public revocation of the identity – however,
the samecannotbe said for other self-signed assertions.
Itmustbenotedthatwhenanentitycreatesadditionalassertions
in a DA, each individual appraiser must make an active decision
to trust, or decline to trust, those assertions. Additionally, part
of the decision to trust a trust anchor must be based on whetheror not the trust anchor can be held legally responsible for errors
occurring within their domain. An exampleof this would be hold-
ing the organisation accountable for the abuse of their powers
thatwerelegitimatelygrantedtooneoftheiragents.Tothisend,
caveats may be placed on the trust of a trust anchor in the form of
policydocuments.Examplesofthiscouldincluderequiringproof
of incorporation (for business entities), or proof of legal identityand citizenship (for individuals), so they may be held legally ac-
countable if necessary. These precautions are often necessary to
providereasonabledeterrentsforactingmaliciouslyoroutsideapredetermined set of rules. Each appraiser must decide what are
acceptable accountability measures for their threat model and each
subjectmustdecideiftheywishtocontinuethetransactionwith
the appraiserunder thoseconditions.
Aside from DSS’ and DA’s themselves, there are always two
authoritiesinvolvedintheissuanceofacertificate.Thesearethe
15Toward Distributed Key Management for Offline Authentication SAICSIT ’18, September 26–28, 2018, Port Elizabeth, South Africa
domain authority, which terminates in a DA, and the issuer who is
identifiedby–andterminatesin–aDSS.DA’sreferencethemselves
as the issuing authority but still refer back to a DSSas the subject
of the authority. DSS’ reference themselves as both the issuing au-
thorityandsubjectoftheauthority.Whenissuinganewcertificate,
both of these must be present and available for the certificate to
bevalid.Thisrequirementisforthecompletionofthecertificate
appraisalalgorithm,whichisrecursive andterminateswhenboth
the issuerand authorityare self-referential.
4.3 CertificateAppraisal
The primary goal of the certificateappraisal algorithm is to verify
thattheinformationcontainedintheheadcertificate(markedas
con Figure3) originate fromthe trust anchorand the bindingof
that information to the subject. The appraisal of certificate graphs
in this manner requires obtaining all certificates that pertain to the
head certificate that is the subject of the appraisal. To this end, the
datastructure described above is one way of serializing and trans-
portingthewholecertificategraph,howeverotherserializations
performing the same functions may also be used.
Foreachappraisalthereisagraphofcertificates α.Thetraversal
ofαstartswiththeheadcertificate αhwherethecurrentcertificate
under review is referred to as γ. Each certificate has a reference to
the subject γs, the issuer’s credential γcandthe issuer’sauthority
γa, each of which references to another certificate in the graph.
References requiring the traversal of more than one edge of the
grapharedenotedas γa→s,whichmeansthesubjectoftheauthority
ofγ.Eachcertificateisvalidatedtosatisfythefollowingconditions:
(1)γmust be signed using the private key corresponding to γc.
(2)References γc→aandγa→smust be equal. If γsis a public
key and not a reference, then γisγs.
(3)Any attestation or capability presented in γmust adhere to
the schemafor thattype.
(4)Any attestations granted in γmust not be disallowed by the
policy defined in γa.
(5)Any capabilities granted in γmust not be disallowed by the
policy defined in γa.
(6)Anycapabilitiesgrantedin γmustbeasubsetofthosede-
fined inγa.
(7)Referenced certificates γs,γaandγcmust be valid at the
timein question.
Iftheseconditionsaresatisfiedforacertificategraph,andthe
trustanchorisdeemedtrustworthybytheappraiser,thentheat-
testationsofthecertificatescontainedmayalsobeassumedtobe
trustworthy.
4.4 Delegation of Authority and Intermediate
Certificates
As discussed in Section 3, PKI has many utilities, however there
arealsomanyweaknesses.Thecertificategraphdiscussedabove
and shown in Figure 3 shows how authority and attributes may be
legitimatelypassed toanotherwhileensuring thattheissuer may
be held accountable. While this basic case theoretically achieves
manyofthegoalsdescribedinSection1,Schneier [34]speaksof
the“humanelement”thatforcesconsiderationofmorethanjust
theory.
Figure 4: Intermediate Certificates for SSI
Intheeventthattheownerofanidentityownsmultipledevices,
they are likely to want to use their attestations and capabilities
seamlesslyacrossmultipleorallofthosedevices.Inanetworked
world, asking users to only authenticate from one of their devices,
or to only have access to a subset of their attestations and capabil-
ities on any one device, is unreasonable. This will result in users
disregarding security in favour of better accessibility. Under the as-
sumptionthatweareusingasinglekeypairtorepresentanidentity;
theprivatekeyforthatidentitymustbepresentoneverydevice
where the owner wants to use the identity. This is a major security
risk. Without a solution to this problem, self-sovereign identity
techniques and the use of the certificates described above could be
more vulnerable than existing technologies and infrastructure.
Thehierarchicalstructureof X.509and intermediatecertificate
authoritiesmay be adapted to solve this problem. As an authority
maydelegateprivilegesfromaDAusingcapabilitiesandattesta-
tions, the same technique (and appraisal mechanism) may be used
to to delegate the signing authority of a DSS. This enables subjects
to generate fresh key pairs, one or more per device, which may be
certificatedwithadelegationofsigningauthoritycapability.Asthe
delegationofauthorityisacapabilitythatispartofacertificate,allotherfeaturesthatcertificatesarecapableof,suchaspoliciesandre-
vocationstatusreferences,areavailable.Figure4showsanexample
ofanintermediatecertificatebeingusedtoissuefurthercertificatesonbehalfoftherootcertificate.Thediagramisintentionallysimilar
to that of Figure 2, as exploration of X.509 in Section 3 gave riseto this solution. Subjects using an intermediate authority, in lieu
oftherootDSS,mustpresentthecertificatesleadingbackto,and
including,the DSS whenbeing appraised.
Theintroductionofintermediatecertificatesaddsfurthercompli-
cationstotheappraisalprocess.Figure5showsthesamecertificategraph as Figure 3 but differs to include intermediate certificates for
each of the users. The diagram shows that the attestation being
issuedtoFrank,byAlice,isbeingsignedbyoneofAlice’skeysthat
has delegated authority from Alice’s DSS. Whenever the certificate
appraisal algorithm recurses to validate the issuer’s credential ( γc),
it must recurse further to validate the entire path of the issuer’scredentialbacktotheissuer’sDSS.Afterthesub-graphbetween
the issuer’s credential and the issuer’s DSS has been validated, the
appraisal process may recurse onto the issuer’s authority ( γa). The
16SAICSIT ’18, September 26–28, 2018, Port Elizabeth, South Africa G. Linklater et al.
Figure 5: Certificate Graph with Intermediate Certificates
Figure 6: Complex Scenario Certificate Graph
onlydifferencetotheappraisalalgorithmasaresultoftheinter-
mediate certificates is the inclusion of the additional sub-graphs
fromeachissuer’sintermediatecertificates.Asthesearethemselves
certificates,theprocessforappraisingthemindividuallyremains
unchanged.
5 APPLICATION SCENARIOS
Thisresearchseekstoconfirmtheutilityofintermediatecertificates
for use in SSI. To evaluate this, two scenarios were constructed:a simple test scenario and a complex test scenario where Frank
seeksanattestationfromAlice,whoisalegitimateagentofFaythe.Figure6showsthecertificategraphforthecomplexscenario.These
are designed to test and confirm the correct behaviour of all thepertinent capabilities of intermediate certificates. Particular details
for each scenarioare now discussed.
5.1 Simple Scenario
Frank has five devices ( F1→F5). He issues himself a DSS and
subsequently issues delegated authority certificates to each device
and creates a secure backup of his DSS and its private key. He does
not need to create a secure backup of his delegated authority keys
because, if lost, they can be easily replaced. Frank continues toacquireanattestationfromFaythewhichhethenincludesinhis
secure backup. If Frank simultaneously loses all five of his devices,
hewillbeabletorecoverhisattestationandbackedupDSS,restore
them to a new device ( F6) and still be able to use the attestation
withoutfurtherinconvenience.
5.2 Complex Scenario
Alice – an agent of Faythe – is issuing an attestation to Frank.
BeforeFrankmaybeissuedanattestationbyAlice,Alicemustfirst
acquire the correct authority from Faythe, who is a well known
andtrustworthyindividual.Faythedoesnotinheritherauthority
from any other party, instead she declares her authority as anattestation. Faythe may now issue a certificate that grants Alicethe ability to exercise a portion of Faythe’s authority. As Faythe
doesnothaveanyderivedkeypairsforheridentity,sheusesher
DSS’privatekeytomakethecertificate.Inadditiontothenewly
issued certificate, Faythe also provides Alice with a copy of herDA and DSS, as these are necessary for the appraisal process of
Alice’scertificateandthereforeanyfurthercertificatesissuedby
Alice. When Alice receives the certificate, she must confirm that
the certificate validates correctly, has the correct information, and
thatsheisabletoauthenticatetoit.AlicemustalsodecideifFaythe
is trustworthy; if not, further use of these credentials is, at best,
pointless and, at worst, dangerous.
17Toward Distributed Key Management for Offline Authentication SAICSIT ’18, September 26–28, 2018, Port Elizabeth, South Africa
Once Alice has her authority to issue certificates in Faythe’s
name,shemaycontinueherinteractionwithFrank.Alicemaynow
issue an attestation to Frank; while the exact contents of the attes-
tation are irrelevant, they should be within Alice’s power to issue.
Unlike Faythe, Alice operates from multiple devices and wishes to
issuetheattestationfromherdevice A2.A2doesnotcontainAlice’s
DSS’ private key but rather contains a certificate that delegates un-
restricted signing authority on Alice’s DSS. The delegated signing
authoritywasissuedonanotherofAlice’sdevices( A1)usingan-
other certificate of delegated signing authority, which was in turn
issuedbyAlice’sDSS.Aliceusesherkeypairon A2toissueFrank’s
attestation. In addition to the attestation, Alice also provides Frank
with the delegated signing authority certificates for A1 andA2,
her DSS, authority, and Faythe’s certificates, as these will all be
necessary to appraise Frank’s certificate. When Frank receives the
certificate,hemustconfirmthatthecertificatevalidatescorrectly,
hasthecorrectinformation,andthatheisabletoauthenticatetoit.
LikeAlice,FrankmustalsodecidewhetherornottotrustFaythe;
if he trusts Faythe, then he does not need to trust Alice personally
as he can trust Faythe’s trust in Alice.
Frank, like Alice, has many devices ( F1 andF2) that he would
like to use his attestation from and has set up a similar chain of
unrestricteddelegatedsigningauthoritytothatofAlice’s.Asthe
attestation was issued with his DSS as the subject, he is able to use
any device with a valid key to authenticate as the owner of the
attestation,solongasheisabletoproduceavalidcertificategraph
leading back to his DSS. When having the attestation appraised,
he must present the attestation itself, it’s entire certificate graphleading back to Faythe’s DSS, a signed nonce, and the certificate
graph leading back to his own DSS. If Frank is able to successfully
authenticate to the attestation given to him by Alice, then the
interactionis successful.
Evaluation Thescenariosabove describe the expectedinterac-
tionofthecertificatestobeconsideredsuccessfulfortheirintendedpurpose.Theyalsodescribethepointsofappraisalandthedecisions
that need to be made by the appraiser that are outside the scope
of this mechanism. The exact protocol for the different parties and
their devices to interact is not yet specified and will be the subject
of its own work. To accomplish this research in the absence of a
defined protocol, the parties and their interactions described in the
scenariowere modeled in software.
6 RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
ThescenariosdescribedinSection5wereeachmodeledinsoftware
and an automated script was used to attempt authentication for
eachcertificateofeachscenariousingeachoftheprivatekeysof
thatscenario.Theresultsoftheseauthenticationattemptsforthe
scenarios are visible in Table 1, where the marked cells show a
successfulauthenticationaccordingtotheappraisalrulesdescribedinSection4.3.Attestationsissuedtoasubjectmaybeauthenticated
by valid credentials for that subject – credentials that have been
granted delegatedauthority –even when thecertificate hierarchy
is multiple levels deep. Other credentials that do not present the
correct proof of delegated authority fail to be authenticated.
Existing key recovery mechanisms, such as social recovery or
keyescrow[ 1],areflawedintheirassumptionsorlackabalanceTable 1: Certificate Authentication Matrix
Certificates(Attestations)
Simple Complex
Frank FrankAliceFaytheCredentials
SimpleFrankRoot /check
F1/check
F2/check
F3/check
F4/check
F5/check
F6/checkComplexFrankRoot /check
F1 /check
F2 /check
AliceRoot /check
A1 /check
A2 /check
Faythe Root /check
betweenaccessibilityandsecurity.Withoutbeingabletorelyonkey
recovery, the value of individual keys must be decreased; one way
this is achieved is by making keys disposable. This is accomplishedbyCA’sandIdP’sthroughkeyrotation.Keyrotationdoesnotsolve
the same problem as key recovery, rather it makes key recovery
unnecessary because individual key pairs are replaceable. Reliance
onasinglekeypairforday-to-dayoperationsintroducesasingle
point of failure into applications. Intermediate certificates improve
on the basic use of PKI by enabling key rotation within an SSI and
makingthelackofviablekeyrecoverymechanismslessprominent.
Despitearootauthorityintroducingasinglepointoffailure,itis
shown to be better than traditional key recovery schemes and risk
may be mitigated by a secure, offline backup scheme. As discussed
inSection3,CA’suseasimilarsystemwherearootcertificateisonly used to issue intermediate certificates and is therefore used
lessoften.Iftherootcertificateisonlyusedperiodicallythenthe
securitymeasuresforgainingaccesstothatcertificatecanbemade
more stringent, as the time between required accesses increases.
For this reason, root certificates may be kept hidden, out of regular
use and therefore may have a longer validity period.
OneoftherequirementsofSSIdescribedbyAllen [2]ispersis-
tence,whichstatesthatanSSImustbe“permanent”.Theimplica-
tions of permanence on the privacy of the individual also bringinto question the desirability of true permanence. Clayton et al
.
[9]concludesthatnooperationconcerningapseudonymshould
have an observable side-effect that could leak the identity of theuser controlling it. The corollary of this is that in a system thatrequires the “leaking” of a pseudonym’s true identity, even in acontrolled way, will eventually be susceptible to traffic analysis
attacks.WhiletheproposalofusingbasicPKIforSSIdoesnotoffer
true permanence, the authors assert that creating a long-lived DSS
is sufficient to approximate permanence and does not carry the
negative privacy implications of true permanence.
18SAICSIT ’18, September 26–28, 2018, Port Elizabeth, South Africa G. Linklater et al.
7 CONCLUSION
ThisresearchsuccessfullydemonstratesaworkingDKMSthatdoes
not rely on any third-party service, such as a distribute ledger,
and does not require that keys be shared between devices usingthe same identity. Intermediate certificates are shown to serve
theirpurposeinallowingmultiplekeystoauthenticatetothesameidentity.Theiremergentpropertyofenablingkeyrotationisshowntoallowidentityownerstorecovertheiridentitiesintheeventthey
loseoneormoreoftheirdevices.Solongastheidentityowner’s
rootprivatekey(oftheirDSS)hasnotbeenlostorcompromised,the
identitymayberecoveredandtheassociatedattestationsmaybe
used. The analysis of Section 6 shows that issuance, authentication
and recovery of certificates operate as expected in a controlled
environmentwhichtherefore renders this research a success.
While intermediate certificates allow multiple keys to authen-
ticatetothesameidentity,theydonothandlethecasewhenone
wishes to remove or revoke keys from an identity. A current re-
vocation technique: certificate revocation lists (CRL), rely on the
appraiser of a certificate having access to the CRL – which is by
definition a centralized registry. Revocation is still an outstanding
problem and a potential barrier to SSI.
For the sake of limiting the scope of this research, conditions of
appraisal relating to policy constraints on attestations and capabili-
tieswerenotconsideredandwillbeinvestigatedinaseparatework.
Appraisals for this research were done assuming privileges passed
fromanauthority(Faythe)tolegitimateagents(Alice),orfroma
DSStocertificatesofdesignatedsigningauthority,areunrestricted.
REFERENCES
[1]HalAbelson,RossAnderson,StevenM.Bellovin,JoshBenaloh,MattBlaze,Whit-
field Diffie, John Gilmore, Peter G. Neumann, Ronald L. Rivest, Jeffrey I. Schiller,
and Bruce Schneier. 1997. The Risks of Key Recovery, Key Escrow, and Trusted
Third-PartyEncryption. GroupReport.CenterforDemocracyandTechnology.
https://cdt.org/files/pdfs/paper-key-escrow.pdf
[2]Christopher Allen. 2016. The Path to Self-Sovereign Identity. (Apr 2016). http://
www.lifewithalacrity.com/2016/04/the-path-to-self-soverereign-identity.html
[3]Christopher Allen, Arthur Brock, Vitalik Buterin, Jon Callas, Duke Dorje, Chris-
tian Lundkvist, Pavel Kravchenko, Jude Nelson, Drummond Reed, Markus
Sabadello, Greg Slepak, Noah Thorp, and Harlan T. Wood. 2015. Decentral-
izedPublicKeyInfrastructure. GroupReport.RebootingtheWebofTrust(RWoT).
https://danubetech.com/download/dpki.pdf
[4]Elaine Barker, Miles Smid, Dennis Branstad, and Santosh Chokhani. 2013. A
Framework for Designing Cryptographic Key Management Systems. NIST Special
Publication 800-130. National Institute of Science and Technology. https://
nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/specialpublications/nist.sp.800-130.pdf
[5]C.BormannandP.Hoffman.2013. RFC7049:ConciseBinaryObjectRepresentation.
IETF RFC. Internet Engineering Task Force. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7049
[6]Pelle Braendgaard. 2018. Different Approaches to Ethereum Iden-tity Standards. Medium. (Jan 2018). https://medium.com/uport/
different-approaches-to-ethereum-identity-standards-a09488347c87
[7]PelleBraendgaard.2018. WhatisauPortidentity? Medium.(Jan2018). https:
//medium.com/uport/what-is-a-uport-identity-b790b065809c
[8]Vitalik Buterin. 2017. The Meaning of Decentralization. Available: https://
medium.com/@VitalikButerin/the-meaning-of-decentralization-a0c92b76a274.
(Feb 2017).
[9]R. Clayton, G. Danezis, and M. Kuhn. 2001. Real World Patterns of Failure in
Anonymity Systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. University of Cam-
bridge,Cambridge,UnitedKingdom. http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~rnc1/Patterns_of_Failure.pdf
[10]
GeorgeCoker,JoshuaGuttman,PeterLoscocco,AmyHerzog,JonathanMillen,
BrianO’Hanlon,JohnRamsdell,ArielSegall,JustinSheehy,andBrianSniffen.2011. Principles of Remote Attestation. International Journal of Information
Security10,2 (Apr 2011), 63–81. https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/
s10207-011-0124-7.pdf
[11] Digital Bazaar. 2018. Veres One. Website. (2018). https://veres.one/[12]NathanEagleandAlex“Sandy”Pentland.2006. RealityMining:SensingComplex
Social Systems. Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 10, 4 (March 2006), 255–268. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s00779-005-0046-3
[13]Niels Ferguson, Bruce Schneier, and Tadayoshi Kohno. 2010. Cryptography
Engineering. Wiley.
[14]Conner Fromknecht, Dragos Velicanu, and Sophia Yakoubov. 2014. A De-
centralized Public Key Infrastructure with Identity Retention. IACR Cryp-
tology ePrint Archive (2014), 803. https://allquantor.at/blockchainbib/pdf/
fromknecht2014decentralized.pdf
[15]Patrick D. Gallagher and Penny Pritzker. 2013. Personal Identity Verification (PIV)
of Federal Employees and Contractors. Federal Information Processing Standards
Publication (FIPS) 201-2. National Institute of Science and Technology.
[16]Phillip Hallam-Baker. 2001. Security Assertions Markup Language. OASIS
Standard 14 (2001), 1–24.
[17]RussellHousley,W.Ford,W.Polk,andD.Solo.1999. RFC2459InternetX.509Public
Key Infrastructure Certificate and CRL Profile. IETF RFC. Internet Engineering
Task Force. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2459
[18]Russell Housley, W. Ford, W. Polk, and D. Solo. 2013. RFC6818 Updates to the
InternetX.509PublicKey Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
(CRL) Profile. IETF RFC. Internet Engineering Task Force. https://tools.ietf.org/
html/rfc6818
[19]Vincent C. Hu, David Ferraiolo, Rick Kuhn, Adam Schnitzer, Kenneth
Sandlin, Robert Miller, and Karen Scarfone. 2014. Guide to Attribute
Based Access Control (ABAC) Definition and Considerations. NIST Spe-
cial Publication 800–162. National Institute of Science and Technology,
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/specialpublications/NIST.SP.800-162.pdf.
[20]InternationalTelecommunicationsUnion.2002. X.609AbstractSyntaxNotation
One(ASN.1)EncodingRules. ITURecommendation.InternationalTelecommu-
nicationsUnion. https://www.itu.int/ITU-T/studygroups/com17/languages/X.
690-0207.pdf
[21]MichaelJones.2015. RFC7518JSONWebAlgorithms(JWA)Specification. IETF
RFC. Internet Engineering Task Force. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7518
[22]Michael Jones, Paul Tarjan, J Bradley, Yaron Goland, Nat Sakimura, John Panzer,
andDirk Balfanz.2011. RFC7515JSON WebSignature (JWS) Specification. IETF
RFC. Internet Engineering Task Force. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7515
[23]Michael Jones, Paul Tarjan, J Bradley, Yaron Goland, Nat Sakimura, John Panzer,
and Dirk Balfanz. 2012. RFC7519 JSON Web Token (JWT) Specification. IETF RFC.
Internet Engineering Task Force. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519
[24]Leslie Lamport, Robert Shostak, and Marshall Pease. 1892. The Byzantine Gener-
alsProblem. ACMTransactionsonProgrammingLanguagesandSystems(TOPLAS)
4,3(1892),382–401. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/prod/
2016/12/The-Byzantine-Generals-Problem.pdf
[25]B.Laurie,A.Langley,andE.Kasper.2013. RFC6962CertificateTransparency. IETF
RFC. Internet Engineering Task Force. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6962
[26]Gregory C. M. Linklater, Christian Smith, James Connan, and Alan Herbert.
2017. JSONSchemaforAttribute-basedAccessControlforNetworkResource
Security. In Proceedings of the 20th Southern Africa Telecommunication Networks
and Applications Conference (SATNAC).
[27]Dave Longley, Manu Sporny, Shane McCarron, and Christopher Allen. 2017.
LinkedDataSignatures. W3CCommunityGroupDraftReportv1.0.W3CCre-
dentials Community Group, https://w3c-dvcg.github.io/ld-signatures/.
[28]Chip Morningstar. 2017. What are Capabilties? Blog. http://habitatchronicles.
com/2017/05/what-are-capabilities/. (May 2017).
[29]DrummondReed,ManuSporny,DaveLongley,ChristopherAllen,RyanGrant,
and Markus Sabadello. 2018. Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs). W3C Commu-
nity Group Draft Report v0.9. W3C Credentials Community Group, https://w3c-
ccg.github.io/did-spec/.
[30]E.Rescorla.2018. TheTransportLayerSecurity(TLS)ProtocolVersion1.3draft-
ietf-tls-tls13-28. IETFInternetDraft28.InternetEngineering TaskForce. https:
//tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-tls-tls13-28
[31]P.Saint-Andre.2017. RFC8141UniformResourceNames(URNs).IETFRFC.Internet
Engineering Task Force. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8141
[32]Natsuhiko Sakimura, J Bradley, M Jones, B de Medeiros, and C Mortimore. 2014.
OpenID Connect Core Specification. The OpenID Foundation (2014).
[33] BruceSchneier. 1996. Applied Cryptography (2 ed.). Wiley.
[34]Bruce Schneier. 2011. Secrets and Lies: Digital Security in a Networked World.
Wiley.
[35]Manu Sporny, Dave Longley, Daniel Burnett, and Gregg Kellogg. 2018. Verifiable
Credentials Data Model. W3C Community Group Editor’s Draft v1.0. W3C
Credentials Community Group, https://w3c.github.io/vc-data-model/.
[36]Manu Sporny, Dave Longley, and Christopher Lemmer Webber. 2018. Veres One
DID Method Specification 1.0. W3C Community Group Draft Report. Digital
Bazaar. https://w3c-ccg.github.io/didm-veres-one/
[37]The Sovrin Foundation. 2018. Sovrin: A Protocol and Token for Self-Sovereign
Identity and Decentralized Trust. The Sovrin Foundation. https://sovrin.org/
wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Sovrin-Protocol-and-Token-White-Paper.pdf
[38]Paul Voigt and Axel von dem Bussche. 2017. The EU General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR): A Practical Guide (1st ed.). Springer.
19