Opportunity Landscaping: Infrastructuring Healthy Learning 
Communities to Power Positive STEM Future s 
 
Nichole Pinkard  
Northwestern Universit y 
633 Clark St, Evanston, IL 60208  
nichole.pinkard@northwestern.edu  
 
ABSTRACT  
The communit ies in which we liv e and learn are largely the 
product of historical decision s related to race and ethnicity made 
by politicians, elected officials, and others with power and 
money. In Chicago, during the Great Migration, the Chicago Real 
Estate Board set up a committee that  determined where Black 
residents could and could not live . In the 1930’s redlining and 
greenlining funneled money and resources away from areas 
identified as “bad investments,” which were communities that 
were non -white, and toward whit e communities deeme d to be a 
“better investment.” In the 1970s, desegregation  mandates 
resulted in new magnet and selective enrollment schools that 
were open to anyone but required young people to travel far 
from their homes to attend. Today, boundaries, s uch as Wards 
and ne ighborhood school districts, continue to be drawn and 
redrawn—sometimes with the best intentions —in ways that 
fracture communities. These imprints of the past continue to 
impact ways of being today that continue to create an inequitable 
present that is not  authentic to the needs and desires of the 
communities in those places. Creating a more equitable 
landscape for learning science, technology, engineering, arts, 
mathematics, and sports (STEAMS) in the future requires making 
the past and present of places v isible and giving agency to 
communities to change their la ndscapes in ways that serve their 
current and future needs.  
 Using lessons  learned from over 20 years designing learning 
ecosystems in collaboration with cities, neighborhoods, af finity 
groups, civi c learning institutions, and families,  I will put forth  
the concept of opportunity landscaping as a  hyperlocal 
ecosystem approach to supporting communities in  visualizing 
and tuning their learning infrastructure to provide  the learning 
places, spaces, reso urces, caring adults, and peers  
to nurture healthy STEM  identities and lifestyles for youth and  
families living in historically disinvested communities.  Given my 
background as a computer scientist, I will focus examples of 
efforts to dev elop computational making activities  throughout 
the ecosystems discussed.  
 CCS Concepts  
•Social and professional topics~Professional topics~Computing 
education~Informal education•So cial and professional 
topics~User characteristics~Race and ethnicity . 
Author Keywords  
Equity;  race and ethnicity ; opportunity landscaping  
ACM Reference format:  
Nichole Pinkard . 2023. Opportunity Landscaping: Infrastructuring 
Healthy Learning Communities to Power Positive STEM Futures . In 
Proceedings of the 54th ACM Techn ical Symposium on C omput er Science 
Education V. 1, March 15 -18, 2023, Toronto, ON, Canada.  ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, 2 pages.  https://do i.org/1 0.1145/3545945.  3569707  
BIOGRAPHY   
Pinkard is the Alice Hamilton Professor of Edu cation and Social 
Policy and Facu lty Director of the  Offic e Community Education 
Partnerships at Northwestern University. She is the founder of  
Digital Youth Network and CitiesLearn, a social learning 
platform that connects youth’s learning opportunities ac ross the 
school, home, community,  and beyond.  
 
Thro ugh co llaborations with city agencies (e.g. YOUmedia with 
the Chicago Public Library, City o f Learning with Mayor Rahm 
Emmanuel, and My Chi, My Future with Mayor Lightfoot). Dr. 
Pinkard and DYN’s work has  ignited new models for 
reimagini ng, visualizing, an d docu menting learning across spaces 
through the creation of existence proofs in urban conte xts. 
Dr. Pinkard is the recipient of a 2010 Common Sense Media 
Award for Outstanding Commitment to Creativity an d Youth,  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for persona l or 
classroom use is granted without fee  provided that copies  are not made  or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that co pies bear this notice and 
the ful l citation on the first page. Copyrights for third -party components of this 
work must be honored. For all other uses, contact t he Owner/A uthor(s).  
SIGCSE 2023 , March 15 -28, 2023, Toronto, ON, Canada . 
© 2022 Copyrigh t is he ld by the owner/author(s).  
ACM IS BN 978-1-4503-9431-4/23/03. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3545945.3569707  
2the Jan Hawkins Award fo r Early Career Cont ributi ons to 
Humanistic Research and Scholarship in Learning Technologies,  
an NSF Early CA REER Fellowship. She holds a B.S. in Computer 
Science from Stanford University, an M.S. in Computer Science 
from Northwestern University, and a Ph. D. in Learning Scie nces 
from Northwestern University.  Her current scholarly interests include the design and use of 
socio -technical systems to support communities in designing 
healthy and joyful learning opportunities t hat all families in 
integrating STEA M into their learni ng and leisure lifestyles.  
 
3
SIGCSE 2023, March 15-18, 2022, Toronto, ON, Canada
Nichole Pinkard