Affective word ratings for concatenative text-to-speech
synthesis
Pirros Tsiakoulis
Innoetics Ltd
Artemidos 6 & Epidavrou
Maroussi, Athens, Greece
ptsiak@innoetics.com 
Institute for Language and
Speech Processing
Research Center “Athena”
Artemidos 6 & Epidavrou
Maroussi, Athens, Greece
spy@ilsp.gr
Sotiris Karabetsos
Institute for Language and
Speech Processing
Research Center “Athena”
Artemidos 6 & Epidavrou
Maroussi, Athens, Greece
sotoskar@ilsp.athena-
innovation.grAimilios Chalamandaris
Innoetics Ltd
Artemidos 6 & Epidavrou
Maroussi, Athens, Greece
aimilios@innoetics.com
ABSTRACT
This work explores aﬀective word ratings as an auxiliary tar-
get cost for unit-selection-based concatenative speech syn-
thesis. The method does not require task-specic crafted
corpora, nor does it rely on additional annotations, mak-
ing it ideal for found data . Following the general philos-
ophy of our text-to-speech system, the approach does not
enforce any explicit prosodic model, instead the aﬀect infor-
mation is implicitly modeled via its contribution to the unit-
selection cost function. The auxiliary aﬀective feature vec-
tor comprises of continuous ratings in three dimensions (va-
lence, arousal and dominance), extracted at the word level
via state-of-the-art sentiment analysis techniques. In this
case study, speech data consists of several professionally-
produced children's audiobooks totaling about 5 hours of
speech. The aﬀective dimensions are shown to correlate well
with acoustic/prosodic features extracted from the speech
data, highlighting their utility for the aﬀective speech syn-
thesis. This is further conrmed via a preference listening
test between the baseline and the aﬀective voice.
CCS Concepts
/x88Human-centered computing !Natural language in-
terfaces; /x88Information systems !Speech / audio search;
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
PCI2016 November 10–12 2016, Patras, Greece
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 123-4567-24-567/08/06. . . $15.00
DOI: 10.475/123 4Keywords
text-to-speech synthesis, aﬀective speech synthesis, senti-
ment analysis for speech synthesis
1. INTRODUCTION
Speech as an interface has already enabled a variety of ap-
plications and is gaining popularity as an auxiliary human-
machine interface, e.g. mobile virtual assistants and voice
search have become a commodity. Concatenative text-to-
speech (TTS) synthesis is widely used in such applications,
since it generates more natural speech compared to statisti-
cal parametric approaches which can produce more intelli-
gible speech [10].
The next frontier for TTS is applications that require not-
only natural and intelligible speech, but also expressiveness,
emotion and aﬀect that is in aggrement with the textual
content. One such challenge is the synthesised audiobooks
application where the current state-of-the-art does not of-
fer the necessary speech output to engage the user in long
listening tasks.
The quality of the synthetic speech that is genereated by a
concatenative TTS system is to a large extend determined by
the source speech corpus. This is why most commercial TTS
systems are built on carefully designed speech databases that
are recorded in a controlled manner following a specic, usu-
ally neutral, speaking style. There are many recent attempts
that try instead to utilise found data , such as audiobooks,
to create synthetic voices [19, 21, 2, 14, 1, 4, 6], with the
promise of more expressive speech synthesis.
1.1 Expressive speech synthesis
According to Schr oder [17], the diﬀerent approaches for
expressive speech synthesis can be broadly classied into
three categories:
synthesis by explicit control where the speech is gener-
ated by applying an explicit prosodic model which isSpyros Raptisusually derived from expressive speech data, e.g. [18,
12, 16]
synthesis by playback where diﬀerent speech databases
for each target emotion / expressive style are used, e.g.
[20, 22, 23]
synthesis by implicit control where speech is generated
with statistical parametric models employing adapta-
tion and interpolation techniques, e.g. [25]
A recent review of the above approaches and the issues as-
sociated with each one of them can be found in [8].
The focus of this work is the investigation of the synthesis
by implicit control approach in the context of concatena-
tive speech synthesis. Our goal is to explore data-driven
machine learning techniques for annotating, analyzing and
modeling aﬀective speech, towards building scalable expres-
sive text-to-speech synthesis systems [15]. To this end, we
are experimenting with sentiment analysis techniques to ex-
tract useful aﬀective features to be used as auxiliary cost
functions in the unit-selection algorithm. In this study, we
employ an aﬀective lexicon that was automatically extracted
from textual resources [13]. The experiments were perfomed
on a speech corpus of several professionally-produced chil-
dren's audiobooks totaling about 5 hours of speech, that was
released for the Blizzard Challenge 2016 [11].
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Sec-
tion 2 gives an overview of our TTS system focusing on the
unit-selection algorithm. Sections 3 and 4 then describe the
data used, the experimental procedure and the results. Sec-
tion 5 presents conclusions.
2. CONCATENATIVE TEXT-TO-SPEECH
SYNTHESIS
A typical TTS system consists of two main components,
namely the front-end and the back-end components [10].
The former, also known Natural Language Processing (NLP)
accounts for every aspect of the linguistic processing of the
input text. The latter is responsible for the speech sig-
nal manipulation and the output generation and can also
be termed as the Back-end Digital Signal Processing unit
(DSP). The concatenative TTS paradigm uses a select-and-
paste technique to generate the speech from prerecorded
speech database. The speech database usually consists of
a suﬃcient corpus of appropriately selected naturally spo-
ken utterances, carefully annotated to the unit level. The
speech units are sub-word chunks, e.g. diphones, that are
concatenated to produce the synthetic speech output. The
resulting repository of speech units may have little or great
redundancy, on which speech variability and overall quality
is signicantly dependent on. The database also contains all
the necessary (meta-) data and functional parameters for
the unit selection stage of the synthesis.
2.1 Our approach
Our system follows the typical front-end/back-end archi-
tecture [24]. The language dependent front-end is mainly
responsible for parsing, analyzing and transforming the in-
put text into an intermediate symbolic format, appropriate
to feed the back-end component. Furthermore, it provides
all the essential information regarding prosody. The back-
end is mostly language-agnostic and can be congured towork with varying degrees of input annotations, from plain
graphemic input to phonetic input with detailed prosodic
annotation.
2.1.1 Front-end
The front-end is composed of a word- and sentence- tok-
enization module, a text normalizer, a letter-to-sound mod-
ule and a prosody module. The prosody is modeled implic-
itly in a data driven manner. The main motivation behind
such a rather simple approach is that naturalistic prosody
patterns can be expected to emerge by the corpus through
the unit selection process, assuming that the corpus is large
enough and that the major factors aﬀecting prosody have
been taken into account. Prosody is modeled in terms of
target pitch values or duration models taking into account
the distance of the unit from prosodically salient units in
its vicinity, such as stressed syllables, pauses, and sentence
boundaries, and the type of these units discriminating be-
tween declarative, interrogative and exclamatory sentences.
2.1.2 Back-end
The back-end is further divided into the the unit selection
and the overlap add modules.
The unit selection module performs the selection of the
speech units from the speech database using explicit match-
ing criteria [9]. Let udenote a diphone and ujbe the j-th
instance unit of uin the available speech database. Then
given an utterance to be synthesised, e.g. a sequence of di-
phones u1; : : : ; uNwhere Nis the length of the utterance
in diphones, the algorithms outputs the best path indexes
j1; : : : ; j Nas:
path
best= argmin
j1;:::;jN(N∑
i=1CT(ui
ji) +N∑
i=2CJ(ui
ji; ui 1
ji 1))
(1)
where CT(ui
j) is the weighted sum of NTtarget costs for
the given unit ui
j, such as prosodic and phonetic context
costs, and CJ(ui
j; ui 1
k) is the weighted sum of NJjoin costs
(spectral, prosodic, etc.) between the adjacent units ui
jiand
ui 1
ji 1:
CT(ui
j) =NT∑
c=1wui
cCT
c(ui
j) (2)
CJ(ui
j; ui 1
k) =NJ∑
c=1wui
cCJ
c(ui
j; ui 1
k) (3)
AllCT
cand CJ
care congured to lie in the same range
of values. The weights in the above sums can be diphone
dependent, as superscripts imply, in order to account for
diﬀerences between diphones (e.g. no need for F0 cost in
non-voiced joins).
The selected sequence of units j1; : : : ; j Nis propagated
in the overlap add module. Only minor modication is per-
formed to the resulting pitch contour in order to remove any
signicant discontinuities at the boundaries of consecutive
voiced units and to smooth the overall pitch curve. Finally,
a custom Time Domain Overlap Add (TD-OLA) method is
used to concatenate the selected units and apply the smooth
pitch contour.2.1.3 Sentiment analysis features
For this work, we used an aﬀective lexicon to incorpo-
rate sentiment analysis features into our TTS system. The
aﬀective lexicon was generated using a sentiment analysis
model that assigns word-based continuous aﬀective ratings
in three dimensions (valence, arousal and dominance). The
front-end module is expanded in order to assign the aﬀective
ratings to each word. This three-dimensional vector forms
an additional word target cost function CT
affective , which is
dened as the Euclidean distance between the assigned and
the source aﬀective feature vector.
3. EXPERIMENTS
This section describes the experiments designed to assess
the validity of the proposed aﬀective target cost. First,
we investigated the correlation between the aﬀective fea-
ture vector and acoustic/prosodic features that are known
to correlate well with aﬀective speech dimensions. Then, we
performed a listening test comparing the system with and
without the additional cost function.
3.1 Data description
The speech data consists of 50 professionally-produced
children's audiobooks released for the Blizzard Challenge
2016 [11]. The audiobooks were split into sentences and were
automatically aligned to the provided text transcripts. The
source text was used in this stage, since we wanted to pre-
serve the punctuation of the original books. The sentences
were further divided into two groups of phrases which were
characterised as either narration orimpersonation . The for-
mer corresponds to the phrases in which the voice actor nar-
rates the story plot, while the latter consists of the dialog
phrases in which the actor impersonates the characters of
the book. The identication of the impersonation segments
was performed in a semi-supervised manner based on the
punctuation of the source text, e.g. quoted text. This data
is summarised in Table 1.
Table 1: Summary of the speech data.
Number of phrases Duration
Impersonation 2608 01h 26m 02s
Narration 4466 03h 48m 58s
Total 7074 05h 15m 01s
3.2 Feature extraction
The following set of features was extracted at the word
level:
Sentiment : the aﬀective continuous ratings of va-
lence, arousal and dominance
Rate : duration, syllables per second, phonemes per
second
F0: mean value, range, minimum and maximum
Intensity : mean value, range, minimum and maxi-
mum
The F0 and intensity were extracted using the Praat tool
[3], and statistics were calculated at the word level. The
rate features were calculated using the force-alignments oftext with the audio, while the number of syllables per word
was determined by the number of vowels it contained. We
limited the analysis into these gross statistics since previous
studies have shown that they are mostly correlated with
sentiment scores extracted from text [5, 7].
3.3 Correlation analysis
The speech data comes from a variety of speaking styles
corresponding to the various books which target children of
diﬀerent age groups and language prociency skills. The
narration and impersonation phrases also diﬀer signicantly
within each group. Such discrimination is not available in
the sentiment model, hence the aﬀective word ratings are
also indiscriminative between the narration and imperson-
ation groups. The prosodic realization of a word is also
very diﬀerent into phrase-nal positions. In order to factor
out these conditions, we performed the correlation analysis
within each book, narration or impersonation group, and
whether the word is phrase nal or not. Finally, we ltered
out unstressed words and words that were not found in the
aﬀective lexicon.
Pairwise correlation between the aﬀective word ratings
and the acoustic features was performed within each book,
narration or impersonation group, and whether the word is
phrase nal or not. Some correlations were found for cer-
tain combinations, however no signicant trend was present.
Canonical correlation analysis was also performed between
the aﬀective feature vector and the acoustic feature vector.
The example shown in Fig. 1 corresponds to the princi-
pal correlation between the aﬀective word ratings (valence,
arousal and dominance) and acoustic features (syllable rate,
mean F0 value and mean intensity value).
The results of the canonical correlation analysis are sum-
marised in Table 2. The correlation coeﬃcients are averaged
across books for each combination of narration/impersonation
and phrase-nal/non-phrase-nal pair. The results show
moderate correlations for the rst two signicant compo-
nents. This result suggests that aﬀective word ratings may
be useful features for text-to-speech synthesis, provided that
the synthesizer also considers narration/impersonation dis-
tinction as well as phrase-nal/non-phrase-nal position of
the word (which is usually considered by default).
Table 2: Average canonical correlations between aﬀective
word ratings and prosodic features.
Condition Non-phrase-nal Phrase-nal
Impersonation 0:41j0:24j0:08 0:44j0:27j0:08
Narration 0:29j0:15j0:04 0:35j0:18j0:07
3.4 Listening test
Two diﬀerent synthetic voices were build for our TTS sys-
tem using the data set described above. The baseline voice
uses the default conguration while the aﬀective voice also
incorporates the aﬀective word ratings in the target cost.
Both voices also include a binary feature that corresponds
to the narration/impersonation distinction.
A preference listening test was designed to evaluate the
proposed method for child-directed speech. Three books
from the given corpus were selected and synthesised using
the two synthetic voices, excluding each time the units that
came from the book to be synthesised. The selected books,−2−1.5 −1−0.5 00.5 11.5 2−3−2−10123
feuddeath
romeosensibledisguises
julietthirteen
sweetheartexcitingtybalt warning
montague
gardenheartproblem
duelrefuse
leaves
gratefulbanishedmantua
yetthursdaypotioncoma
daysfuneral
sense
workscarefulgrief
trespassingslainRomeo And Juliet (impersonation − phrase−final)
 −  0.253*SylRate −  0.039*MeanF0 + 0.028*MeanIntensity −  1.208*Arousal + 6.739*Dominance −  5.103*ValenceFigure 1: Canonical correlation between aﬀective word ratings and prosodic features. The x-axis corresponds to the linear
combination of acoustic features (syllable rate, mean F0 value and mean Intensity value), while the y-axis corresponds to the
linear combination of aﬀective word ratings (valence, arousal and dominance)
namely Stone Soup ,The Daydreamer and There Was A
Crooked Man , are short in total duration facilitating the
listening experiment. Five listeners were presented with the
book script and a pair of synthetic prompts for each phrase,
and was asked to choose the most appropriate or indicate
\no preference". The presentation order was randomised,
and the listeners were allowed to playback the audio multi-
ple times.
The results are summarised in Table 3; also showing the
breakdown according to the book as well as whether the
phrase was narrative or an impersonation. For each com-
parison the number of judgements is shown as well as the
statistical signicance level computed using a one-sided bi-
nomial test after equally splitting the \no preference" val-
ues. The statistical tests are clearly not independent from
one another, however the number of samples does not favour
testing each combination of the three conditions separately.
The results show that there is an overall signicant prefer-
ence for the aﬀective voice. There is a high percentage of the
\no preference"choice, which is attributed to many synthetic
prompts that were identical for both voices. When examin-ing the various breakdowns the preference is still in favor of
the aﬀective voice, but the result is not always statistically
signicant.
The preference for the aﬀective voice in the case of imper-
sonation (15.3%) is lower compared to narration (29.3%),
although in both cases the preference is higher than the
baseline voice. This is related to data coverage in these
two domains. As shown in Table 1 the data mostly contains
narrative speech, while the impersonations account for less
than one third of the total duration of available speech. It
must also be noted the data labeled as Impersonation con-
tains multiple expressive styles (diﬀerent characters, emo-
tions, etc), however we did not segment the data into more
categories becuase the data would be very scarce for each
subcategory.
3.5 Discussion
In agreement with previous ndings [5, 7], we have found
correlations between aﬀective dimensions extracted from text,
with gross statistics of acoustic features, such as speaking
rate, F0 and intensity. It must be noted that our analysisTable 3: Preference results comparing the baseline to the aﬀective voice. Signicant results are shown in
bold (p <0.05).
Condition #Judgements Baseline No Preference Aﬀective p-value
StoneSoup 195 7.7% 75.4% 16.9% 0.197
Daydreamer 160 18.8% 60.0% 21.3% 0.812
CrookedMan 85 11.8% 40.0% 48.2% 0.001
Impersonation 150 9.3% 75.3% 15.3% 0.462
Narration 290 14.1% 56.6% 29.3% 0.011
Total 440 12.5% 63.0% 24.5% 0.011
technique diﬀers from previous studies at level at which the
statistics are aggregated. It would be interesting to repli-
cate previous ndings at the phrase-level using this data
set, however that is out of the scope of this work.
We perform our analysis at the word level in order to
investigate the potential use of word-level aﬀective features
in the context of text-to-speech synthesis. The word-level
statistics are more noisy than phrase-level statistics, and
hence pairwise correlations with word-level aﬀective ratings
were not observed.
It must also be noted that the aﬀective word ratings were
automatically generated using general sentiment analysis tech-
niques and were not designed for the given task. However,
using canonical correlation analysis and after factoring out
speaking style, impersonation and phrase-nal position, we
were able to identify a moderate correlation between the af-
fective feature vector and the acoustic feature vector. These
ndings corroborate our initial assumption that aﬀective
word ratings can be useful features for text-to-speech syn-
thesis.
Since the target text-to-speech system is unit-selection
based, the eﬀect of the aﬀective target cost is to favor the
selection of units that come from words that have similar
aﬀective dimensions with the target word. The rest of the
cost functions deal with the target context / prosody and
continuity constraints.
Given the above, the high percentage of the \no prefer-
ence" choice was anticipated. There are many cases where
the standard cost functions restrict the candidate units in
such a way that the aﬀective cost has no signicant eﬀect.
The weight of the aﬀective cost was set so that its range is
comparable to the rest of the target cost and no additional
experiments were performed to ne-tune it. The fact that we
found a preference bias for the aﬀective voice is an encour-
aging result, towards using such automated cost functions
for aﬀective speech synthesis.
4. CONCLUSIONS
We have investigated the use of aﬀective word ratings in
the context of concatenative speech synthesis. The aﬀective
feature vector comprises of continuous ratings in three di-
mensions (valence, arousal and dominance), automatically
extracted from textual resource via state-of-the-art senti-
ment analysis techniques. The experiments were performed
on a speech corpus of several professionally-produced chil-
dren's audiobooks totaling about 5 hours of speech.
Correlations were found between aﬀective dimensions re-
trieved from sentiment analysis and acoustic features ex-
tracted from speech (speaking rate, mean F0 and mean in-tensity values), using canonical correlation analysis. The
aﬀective feature vector was incorporated in our TTS sys-
tem as an auxiliary target cost function in the unit selection
algorithm. Two voices were built from the speech corpus
diﬀering only in the extra aﬀective cost function.
A preference listening test designed for children's audio-
book task showed a signicant preference for the aﬀective
voice. This is a promising result that highlights potential im-
provement of concatenative speech synthesis relying on data
driven techniques, such as sentiment analysis tools, without
enforcing any explicit model for sentiment in speech.
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Ms Elisavet Palogiannidi, Techni-
cal University of Crete, and Prof. Alexandros Potamianos,
National Technical University of Athens, for providing the
sentiment analysis resources.
6. REFERENCES
[1] X. Anguera, N. Perez, A. Urruela, and N. Oliver.
Automatic synchronization of electronic and audio
books via tts alignment and silence ltering. In
Multimedia and Expo (ICME), 2011 IEEE
International Conference on , pages 1{6. IEEE, 2011.
[2] O. Boeﬀard, L. Charonnat, S. Le Maguer, D. Lolive,
and G. Vidal. Towards fully automatic annotation of
audio books for tts. In LREC , pages 975{980, 2012.
[3] P. Boersma et al. Praat, a system for doing phonetics
by computer. Glot international , 5(9/10):341{345,
2002.
[4] N. Braunschweiler, M. J. Gales, and S. Buchholz.
Lightly supervised recognition for automatic
alignment of large coherent speech recordings. In
INTERSPEECH , pages 2222{2225, 2010.
[5] C. Busso, S. Lee, and S. Narayanan. Analysis of
emotionally salient aspects of fundamental frequency
for emotion detection. Audio, Speech, and Language
Processing, IEEE Transactions on , 17(4):582{596,
2009.
[6] A. Chalamandaris, P. Tsiakoulis, S. Karabetsos, and
S. Raptis. Using audio books for training a
text-to-speech system. In LREC , pages 3076{3080,
2014.
[7] M. Charfuelan and M. Schr oder. Correlation analysis
of sentiment analysis scores and acoustic features in
audiobook narratives. In 4th International Workshop
on Corpora for Research on Emotion Sentiment &
Social Signals, Istanbul, Turkey , 2012.[8] D. Govind and S. M. Prasanna. Expressive speech
synthesis: a review. International Journal of Speech
Technology , 16(2):237{260, 2013.
[9] A. J. Hunt and A. W. Black. Unit selection in a
concatenative speech synthesis system using a large
speech database. In Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing, 1996. ICASSP-96. Conference
Proceedings., 1996 IEEE International Conference on ,
volume 1, pages 373{376. IEEE, 1996.
[10] S. King. Measuring a decade of progress in
text-to-speech. Loquens , 1(1):e006, 2014.
[11] S. King and V. Karaiskos. The Blizzard Challenge
2016. 2016.
[12] J. A. Louw, G. Schlunz, W. Van der Walt, F. De Wet,
and L. Pretorius. The speect text-to-speech system
entry for the blizzard challenge 2013. 2013.
[13] E. Palogiannidi, E. Iosif, P. Koutsakis, and
A. Potamianos. Valence, arousal and dominance
estimation for english, german, greek, portuguese and
spanish lexica using semantic models. In Sixteenth
Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association , 2015.
[14] K. Prahallad and A. W. Black. Segmentation of
monologues in audio books for building synthetic
voices. Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, IEEE
Transactions on , 19(5):1444{1449, 2011.
[15] S. Raptis, S. Karabetsos, A. Chalamandaris, and
P. Tsiakoulis. A framework towards expressive speech
analysis and synthesis with preliminary results.
Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces , 9(4):387{394,
2015.
[16] G. I. Schlunz and E. Barnard. A discourse model of
aﬀect for text-to-speech synthesis. 2013.
[17] M. Schr oder. Expressive speech synthesis: Past,
present, and possible futures. In Aﬀective information
processing , pages 111{126. Springer, 2009.
[18] M. A. M. Shaikh, A. R. F. Rebordao, and K. Hirose.
Improving tts synthesis for emotional expressivity by a
prosodic parameterization of aﬀect based on linguistic
analysis. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Speech Prosody, Chicago, USA , 2010.
[19] A. Stan, O. Watts, Y. Mamiya, M. Giurgiu, R. A.
Clark, J. Yamagishi, and S. King. Tundra: a
multilingual corpus of found data for tts research
created with light supervision. In INTERSPEECH ,
pages 2331{2335, 2013.
[20] I. Steiner, M. Schr oder, M. Charfuelan, and A. Klepp.
Symbolic vs. acoustics-based style control for
expressive unit selection. In SSW , pages 114{119,
2010.
[21] E. Sz ekely, J. P. Cabral, P. Cahill, and
J. Carson-Berndsen. Clustering expressive speech
styles in audiobooks using glottal source parameters.
InInterspeech , pages 2409{2412, 2011.
[22] P. Tsiakoulis, C. Breslin, M. Gasic, M. Henderson,
D. Kim, M. Szummer, B. Thomson, and S. Young.
Dialogue context sensitive hmm-based speech
synthesis. In Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2014 IEEE International Conference on ,
pages 2554{2558. IEEE, 2014.
[23] P. Tsiakoulis, C. Breslin, M. Gasic, M. Henderson,
D. Kim, and S. J. Young. Dialogue context sensitivespeech synthesis using factorized decision trees. In
INTERSPEECH , pages 2937{2941, 2014.
[24] P. Tsiakoulis, S. Karabetsos, A. Chalamandaris, and
S. Raptis. An overview of the ilsp unit selection
text-to-speech synthesis system. In Articial
Intelligence: Methods and Applications , pages
370{383. Springer, 2014.
[25] J. Yamagishi, T. Kobayashi, M. Tachibana, K. Ogata,
and Y. Nakano. Model adaptation approach to speech
synthesis with diverse voices and styles. In Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing, 2007. ICASSP 2007.
IEEE International Conference on , volume 4, pages
IV{1233. IEEE, 2007.