Portrayals of Race and Gender: Sentiment in 100 Years of
Children’s Literature
Anjali Adukia∗
University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois, USA
adukia@uchicago.eduCallista Christ
University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois, USA
callistac@uchicago.edu
Anjali Das
Columbia University
New York, New York, USA
ad3888@columbia.eduAyush Raj
Saint Francis High School
Mountain View, California, USA
raj.ayush@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
The way that people of different identities are portrayed in chil-
dren’s books can send subconscious messages about how positively
or negatively children should think about people with those iden-
tities. These messages can then shape the next generation’s per-
ceptions and attitudes about people, which can have important
implications for belief formation and resource allocation. In this
paper, we make two contributions: (1) we examine the depiction
of race and gender in award-winning children’s books from the
last century, and (2) we examine how consumption of these books
relates to local beliefs. First, we analyze the sentiment associated
with the famous individuals mentioned in these books. While the
sentiment surrounding women is positive overall, on average, we
see that Black women are more often portrayed with negative sen-
timent in Mainstream books, while White women are more often
portrayed with positive sentiment. Because children’s books in the
United States depict more White women overall, this disguises the
more negative intersectional portrayals of Black women. Books
that center underrepresented identities are more likely to portray
all characters with more positive sentiment. A century ago, women
were much less positively spoken about than men, but the average
sentiment of females and males has converged over time. The differ-
ence in sentiment connected with Black people and White people
has also decreased over time, but there still remains a substantial
gap. Second, we then analyze the relationship between book pur-
chases and local beliefs to understand the potential messages being
transmitted to children in different parts of society. We see that
more purchases of books with positive sentiment towards Black
characters are associated with a larger proportion of individuals
who believe that White people in the United States have certain
advantages because of the color of their skin and who are angry that
racism exists. Understanding the messages that may be implicitly
∗All authors contributed equally to this research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA
©2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9347-8/22/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3530190.3534811– or explicitly – sent to children through highly influential books
can lend insight into the factors that may shape children’s beliefs
and attitudes.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Social and professional topics →Race and ethnicity ;Gen-
der;•Applied computing →Law, social and behavioral sci-
ences ;Education .
KEYWORDS
sentiment analysis, children’s books, race, gender, education
ACM Reference Format:
Anjali Adukia, Callista Christ, Anjali Das, and Ayush Raj. 2022. Portrayals
of Race and Gender: Sentiment in 100 Years of Children’s Literature. In
ACM SIGCAS/SIGCHI Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies
(COMPASS) (COMPASS ’22), June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3530190.3534811
1 INTRODUCTION
Children’s books transmit messages about society that can shape
and influence the next generation’s perceptions, assumptions, and
attitudes about people. In particular, the way that people of differ-
ent identities are talked and written about can send subconscious
messages about how positively or negatively children should think
about people with those identities.
In this paper, we examine how race and gender are portrayed
by analyzing how “positively” or “negatively” famous individuals
in children’s books from the last century are portrayed. We term
this portrayal “sentiment” and use it because it is an indicator of
an author’s or book’s attitude towards characters of different racial
groups or genders. We trained a BERT model in order to make
predictions of the sentiment of sentences that mention famous
individuals. We then analyzed the varying sentiments towards
characters of different identities.
The books we examine have received recognition from the Amer-
ican Library Association. We divide the books into two collections:
“Mainstream” books, which are a common feature in the lives of
children in the United States, whether in schools or homes, and
are more likely to be bought or checked out than other children’s
books, and “Diversity” books, which explicitly center underrepre-
sented identities. Because children are more likely to be exposed to
20COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA Anjali Adukia, Callista Christ, Anjali Das, and Ayush Raj
Mainstream books, it is important to understand the messages be-
ing transmitted in these books, and thus the potential relationship
between exposure and beliefs.
We find that books that center underrepresented identities are
more likely to portray characters of all identities with positive sen-
timent. While the sentiment surrounding women is positive overall,
on average, we see that Black women are more often portrayed
with negative sentiment in Mainstream books, while White women
are more often portrayed with positive sentiment. Because chil-
dren’s books in the United States depict more White women overall,
this disguises the more negative intersectional portrayals of Black
women. A century ago, women were much less positively written
about than men, but the average sentiment of females and males
has converged over time.
Additionally, we analyze the relationship between book pur-
chases and local beliefs to understand the potential messages being
transmitted to children in different parts of society. We see that
more purchases of books with positive sentiment towards Black
characters are associated with a larger proportion of individuals
who believe that White people in the United States have certain
advantages because of the color of their skin and, separately, who
are angry that racism exists.
How people are differentially portrayed in children’s literature
sends implicit and explicit messages to children about different iden-
tities. These messages can then shape beliefs and attitudes which
may influence long-term decisions that have important equity and
justice implications. This paper helps to shed light on some of the
disparate messages contained in highly influential children’s books
in the United States over the last century.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present some
related background. In Section 3, we describe our data. In Section
4, we present our methods for our language model and then for
analyzing sentiment. In Section 5, we summarize the results of our
analysis, and in Section 6, we conclude.
2 BACKGROUND
Early exposure to stimuli shape children’s beliefs about the world,
others, and themselves [ 6,11,21,37,43]. Recent studies of books
in Germany and China show that childhood exposure to textbooks
with different content yields correspondingly different beliefs in
adulthood, about history and self, respectively [ 10,25]. Abstracting
their estimates to the U.S. context, [ 2] find that children exposed to
influential books in the United States are presented with a version
of the world in which White people and males are the dominant
groups. This message is transmitted in both text and images; people
from these groups are represented far more often than explained
by their share of the population, with all other groups being repre-
sented far less. This suggests that the millions of children exposed
to these books are far more likely to believe in a world where White
people and, separately, males, occupy dominant social roles, than
they would were the books used to teach them more equitable in
their representation of race and gender.1
1Studies also show or suggest that exposure to influencing factors such as books,
peers, and teachers and other adults can influence child learning outcomes such as
aspirations, academic performance, and persistence in school [6, 24, 39, 40].Skewed representation of social categories such as race and gen-
der are particularly salient to children [ 6,22] and could contribute
to inequality in personal and societal outcomes, ranging from labor
force participation and pay to incarceration and mortality [ 8,16,38].
However, race and gender are often treated as mutually exclusive
categories of experience that do not appropriately account for the
intersectionality of identities [ 13–15].2A consequence of this is
that individuals with multiple marginalized or excluded identities
are often then excluded from theoretical, analytical, and practical
consideration.3
Children may process identity categories – and intersectionality
– subconsciously and depend less on focused cognitive skills when
categorizing different identities. They may develop their heuristics
and implicit biases through the feeling that is associated with differ-
ent identities. For example, if Black females are depicted as angry,
but White females are depicted as benevolent, this may shape a
child’s perceptions of how different individuals interact with the
world [26].
Moreover, prior research has found that natural human language,
and thus literature, has a positivity bias [ 9,19,27,32,48]. However,
these studies examine sentiment in aggregate. Analyses that aver-
age across all individuals, thus potentially overweighting those who
are more represented, may conceal the differential ways that people
from underrepresented identities may be portrayed and neglect to
consider intersectional portrayals.
When presenting content to children, educators not only want to
know whether characters of different backgrounds are represented;
they also want to know how characters of different backgrounds
are represented. In this study, we examine the sentiment typically
attached to characters with different race and gender backgrounds
to shed light on one aspect of the way that identities are portrayed,
which can have important implications for shaping children’s be-
liefs.
3 DATA
We are interested in understanding the representation to which
children are exposed regularly. We therefore draw from a set of chil-
dren’s books with which children are likely to interact. Specifically,
we examine books that received awards administered or featured
by the Association for Library Service to Children, a division of the
American Library Association. We divide them into two collections:
(1) a “Mainstream” collection and (2) a “Diversity” collection.
The Mainstream collections comprises books that have received
recognition through the Newbery Medal or Caldecott Medal, the
two oldest children’s book awards in the United States starting in
1922. The books in the Mainstream collection are more likely to
be purchased and two to four times as likely to be checked out
from libraries than other children’s books [ 2,12]. This increased
exposure of these books may then lead to them having greater
influence than other children’s books, which is consistent with
2[17] defines intersectionality as “the interaction of multiple identities and experiences
of exclusion and subordination,” thus accounting not only for multiple identities but
also how those identities interact with experiences of exclusion and subordination.
3For example, the experiences of women of color may be minimized or ignored even in
content designed to be deliberately equitable in their representation, if representation
of women is restricted to White women, and representation of people of color is
restricted to males.
21Portrayals of Race and Gender: Sentiment in 100 Years of Children’s Literature COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA
research on the central role these books have in U.S. children’s
literature [33, 44].
The Diversity collection comprises books that have received
recognition for explicitly centering underrepresented identities.
The first award in this collection began in 1970. We examine books
from the following awards: Rise Feminist (formerly known as
Amelia Bloomer), American Indian Youth Literature Award, Améri-
cas Award, Arab American Book Award, Asian/Pacific American
Award for Literature, Carter G. Woodson Book Awards, Coretta
Scott King Book Awards, Dolly Gray Award, Ezra Jack Keats Book
Award, Middle East Book Award, National Jewish Book Award,
Notable Books for a Global Society, Pura Belpré Award, Rainbow
Book List, Schneider Family Book Award, Skipping Stones Honor
Awards, South Asia Book Awards, Stonewall Book Awards, Sydney
Taylor Book Award, and Tomas Rivera Mexican American Award.
To characterize how race-gender identities are portrayed in our
set of books overall and over time, we combine our data at two
levels: (1) at the collection level, so that we can measure the overall
representation in the Diversity and Mainstream collections, and (2)
at the collection-by-decade level, so that we can measure changes
in sentiment over time.
4 METHODS
4.1 Data Pre-Processing
We use Google Vision Optical Character Recognition to detect and
extract text from the scanned pages of each children’s book.4We
then use the pre-trained Punkt tokenizer from Python’s NLTK
library [ 7] to split the corpus into sentences. For each sentence, we
remove line breaks, non-ASCII characters, and punctuation. We
then perform the famous figure extraction detailed in Section 4.2
and finally add the “[CLS]” and “[SEP]” tokens to the start and end
of sentences, which is necessary for our sentiment models.
4.2 Famous Figure Extraction
We are interested in understanding how the sentiment associated
with different identities may differ in children’s books. Because
children’s books often have fictional characters without verifiable
identities, we focus our analysis on the famous individuals men-
tioned in the book text who have known race and gender. This
enables us to classify the race and gender of characters with high
accuracy.
We use SpaCy’s Named Entity Recognition (NER) pipeline to
extract all “PERSON” entities from the Mainstream and Diversity
collections [ 28].5To determine which entities identified by NER
refer to a famous individual, we compare each entity that has at least
two names (i.e., a first and last name) with a publicly available data
set, Pantheon 2.0, that contains data from over 70,000 Wikipedia
biographies that have a presence in more than 15 language editions
of Wikipedia [ 50]. If the entity exists in the Pantheon 2.0 data set, we
classify them as famous. We apply a fuzzy matching algorithm6to
determine whether a name matches a famous figure in this data set.
4This process is restricted to the conversion of scanned text into ASCII characters
only.
5We test a variety of SpaCy NER pipelines, and found that the en_core_web_lg pipeline
performed best on our data set.
6We use a Levenshtein’s ratio threshold of 0.9 for the fuzzy matching to capture slight
variations in a name.The Pantheon 2.0 data set contains some demographic information
about each famous individual such as their gender but does not
include race; we manually code the race of each famous individual
that appears in our sample of children’s books. If a famous figure
is detected in our text, we replace their name in the text with their
corresponding race-gender category, as in [ 1]. For example, “Rosa
Parks” would be replaced with “black _woman” in the text. In the
Mainstream collection, 24,365 unique and 272,776 total “PERSON”
counts were detected from NER. Of these, 925 unique and 5,526
total counts were mapped to the Pantheon dataset and labeled as
famous figures. In the Diversity collection, there were 45,892 unique
“PERSON” entities and 379,074 total counts. From this, 2,267 unique
individuals and 11,061 counts were determined as famous figures.
While this method can not perfectly identify all famous individuals,
we found no evidence that errors differed by race or gender.7
In Figure 1, Panel A, we show the number of instances of famous
people who are classified as a given race-gender identity in the
Mainstream and Diversity collections. A majority of the famous
individuals mentioned in both collections are White males, with
the Diversity collection highlighting many more Black individuals
than the Mainstream collection. Black females are the least likely
to be included. Note that we limit our analysis to Black and White
individuals who identify as part of a binarized gender categorization
(female, male), because our sample of other race-gender identities
is too small to have sufficient power to estimate sentiment using
our computational models. This underscores how other identities
are even further underrepresented.8
4.3 Sentiment Analysis Model Selection
We are interested in analyzing howdifferent identities are portrayed
to children in the text of their books. One way to measure attitudes
or feelings towards a group in text data is by analyzing sentiment.
Sentiment analysis has been used to assess text from various sources
such as news reports [ 5,51], social media [ 3,41], literature [ 32,36],
consumer reviews [ 29,41,49], and academic writing [ 34,46]. We
apply this natural language processing tool to analyze sentiment
of race and gender in our corpora of children’s books.
Many sentiment models are based off of Python’s TextBlob [ 35]
and VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment Reasoner)
models [ 31]. We do not use these as our primary models, because
they perform with lower accuracy in our corpora. This is likely
because they are dictionary-based and rule-based sentiment anal-
ysis tools specifically attuned to sentiments expressed in social
media, and therefore fail to understand more complex expressions
of sentiment such as double negatives. We therefore use TextBlob
and Vader to establish a baseline.
In order to measure sentiment, we use a BERT (Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformers) language model [ 18].
BERT has several advantages over dictionary-based approaches
because it is able to establish context around text rather than scoring
sentiment based on individual words, and can be fine-tuned easily.
7One important limitation of this method is that NER does not perfectly capture names.
For example, Martin Luther King Junior is mentioned in our text but in some instances
only “Martin Luther” is recognized, resulting in an under count of Martin Luther King
Jr. and an over count of Martin Luther.
8Traditional content analysis methods would be better able to assess sentiment of
other under-represented race-gender identities in these corpora.
22COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA Anjali Adukia, Callista Christ, Anjali Das, and Ayush Raj
Figure 1: Sample Characteristics
(a) Number of Mentions, by Race-Gender
(b) Distributions of Predicted Sentiment Labels
Note: Panel A shows the number of famous figures mentioned in
the Mainstream and Diversity collections for each race-gender
identity category. The total number of famous figures in the
Mainstream collection is 5,526 and in the Diversity collection is
11,061. Panel B shows the number of sentences classified with each
predicted sentiment labels by collection.
This allows for pre-training of contextual representations from
unlabeled text by considering context from both sides of the text of
interest.
We tested various BERT models on our data to determine the
optimal model for our task of sentiment analysis. We evaluated how
well each model understood our data by using a masked language
modeling task. We input 380 randomly selected sentences from
our data into each model and asked the model to predict the last
word of each sentence. We found that the bert-large-cased model
marginally outperformed other models on this task. However, all of
the BERT models we tested achieved between 36% and 42% accuracy
on this masked language modeling task. So, all of the models were
fine-tuned and evaluated on a custom-created test set.
4.4 Fine-tuning BERT models for Sentiment
Analysis
We then fine-tune our BERT models to account for our specific
context. Because BERT is a general-purpose language model, it is
not specifically made for sentiment analysis. Therefore, we mustfine-tune the language model on a separate data set in order to help
the model develop its ability to classify the sentiment of sentences.
We used the Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST-5) data set to fine-
tune our model [ 45]. These data contain 11,855 sentences extracted
from movie reviews, each labeled on a scale from 1-5 (1 for very
negative, 2 for negative, 3 for neutral, 4 for positive, and 5 for very
positive). We chose this dataset because its sentences are more
formal and therefore more similar to sentences found in children’s
books than tweets or other social media posts as used in VADER.
We convert the range of the labels to between -1 (Very Negative)
and 1 (Very Positive) in order to be interpreted by our PyTorch
dataloaders.
To fine-tune the model, we apply a one-layer feedforward classi-
fier on top of the BERT model itself, which consists of a Linear layer,
a ReLU activation function, and final Linear layer. We then train
this model on the SST-5 dataset. This then predicts the sentiment as-
sociated with each sentence in both collections. In our analysis, we
use average sentiment across collections, or collections-by-decade,
for each race and gender identity.
In Figure 1, Panel B, we show the distributions of the predicted
sentiment for each collection. There are overall more sentences with
predicted negative sentiment than predicted positive sentiment in
each collection.
4.5 Evaluating BERT Models
To evaluate our models, we create a test set containing 400 ran-
domly chosen sentences from both the Mainstream and Diversity
collections (cf. Section 4.1). Because we are more interested in non-
neutral sentiments and a majority of sentences in our data have
neutral sentiment, we selected sentences that VADER predicted to
have non-neutral sentiment to create the test set. We had three
hand-coders manually label the sentiment for each of the 400 sen-
tences on the same scale as the SST-5 data set, and used the majority
score for each sentence as our final sentiment score.
We predict the sentiment score for each sentence in our test
set for all models. We then compute the accuracies and average F-
scores for the test data. Table 1 organizes our findings for accuracy
and F-scores for the models we evaluated.
Table 1: Model Performance
Model Accuracy F-Score
bert-base-uncased 0.47 0.46
best-bert-model 0.43 0.41
bert-base-uncased-pytorch-trainer 0.45 0.42
bert-base-uncased-new-layers 0.46 0.44
roberta-base 0.39 0.37
vader 0.38 0.28
textblob 0.42 0.37
nlptown 0.26 0.30
Note: This table reports accuracy and F-scores for non-neutral
sentences in our test set. The bert-base-uncased model has the
architecture described in Section 4.4. The best-bert-model has a
Softmax layer added to this baseline architecture. The bert-base-
uncased-new-layers model contains some layer experimentation,
which includes new Linear layers.
23Portrayals of Race and Gender: Sentiment in 100 Years of Children’s Literature COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA
We use the bert-base-uncased model as it had the highest accu-
racy score on the non-neutral sentences.9While the BERT model
is accurate on the SST-5 dataset, one potential limitation is that the
performance may not be completely replicated when the model
makes predictions on our custom test data set, which is limited to
sentences that contain a famous figure.
5 RESULTS
We are interested in understanding how children’s books depict
characters of different race-gender identities. Specifically, we ex-
amine how positively or negatively characters are portrayed using
sentiment analysis. We then examine how local book purchases
relate to local consumer beliefs.
5.1 Sentiment of Race and Gender
Figure 2: Sentiment of Characters, by Race and Gender
(a) Race-Gender
(b) Race
 (c) Gender
Note: This figure shows the average sentiment of famous figures in
different race-gender (Panel A), race (Panel B), and gender (Panel
C) identity groups in the Mainstream and Diversity collections for
non-neutral sentences.
In Figure 2, we show the average sentiment by race-gender, race,
and gender in the Mainstream and Diversity collections. We see
that the average sentiment in the books in the Diversity collection
9The bert-base-uncased model that we used had approximately 47 percent accuracy,
and the highest accuracy a BERT model has achieved on the SST-5 dataset is approx-
imately 59 percent, or 80 percent of the maximum accuracy we may have hoped to
have obtained [47].is more positive than the average sentiment in the books in the
Mainstream collection for each identity.
We show in Figure 2, Panel A that the difference in average
sentiment between Diversity and Mainstream books is greatest
for Black females and for Black males. There is little difference in
average sentiment of White males between each collection. Black
males, White females, and White males are portrayed positively on
average in both Mainstream and Diversity collections. However,
Black females are more likely to be depicted with negative senti-
ment in the Mainstream collection. These reflect the net sentiment
associated with different identities, and each set of identities have
sentences associated with them that are classified as being positive
and as being negative.
Examples of sentences classified as having positive sentiment
include:
“Closing her eyes, Marian Anderson began
to sing, and her thrilling contralto voice car-
ried across the Mall, touching every per-
son who had come to hear her. [ 23]
”
“Anne Hutchinson’s fearless stand for
truth as she saw it-this, together with
her remarkable gifts, set her apart
from all the women of her day. [ 20]
”
Examples of sentences classified as having negative sentiment in-
clude:
“Interrupting another’s speech was almost
as horrendous an act in Aunt Cordelia’s
code as neglecting one’s homework
or calling Jane Austen a bore. [ 30]
”
.
“As in: I wanted a pair of Stephon Mar-
bury’s sneakers (Starburys), but Dad called
him a selfish millionaire with a bad atti-
tude, and why would I want to be associ-
ated with such a churlish choke artist. [ 4]
”
.
24COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA Anjali Adukia, Callista Christ, Anjali Das, and Ayush Raj
We see in Figure 2, Panels B and C that the average sentiment
surrounding women, men, and White people is positive overall.
However, we see that Mainstream books are more likely to depict
Black people with negative sentiment. As we see in Panel A, this
average negative sentiment may be driven by the average negative
depiction of Black females. Similarly, we see that females are more
likely to be depicted with positive sentiment, with much less posi-
tive sentiment overall in the Mainstream collection. This smaller
positive sentiment of females disguises the disparity between how
Black women and White women are portrayed. We see that Black
females are more likely to be depicted with negative sentiment
in the Mainstream books, whereas White women are more often
portrayed with positive sentiment. Because U.S. children’s books
include more White women than Black women as characters, this
may conceal the more negative intersectional portrayals of Black
women in society.
Figure 3: Sentiment of Characters by Gender, Over Time
COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA Anjali Adukia, Callista Christ, Anjali Das, and Ayush Raj
We see in Figure 2, Panels B and C that the average sentiment
surrounding women, men, and White people is positive overall.
However, we see that Mainstream books are more likely to depict
Black people with negative sentiment. As we see in Panel A, this
average negative sentiment may be driven by the average negative
depiction of Black females. Similarly, we see that females are more
likely to be depicted with positive sentiment, with much less posi-
tive sentiment overall in the Mainstream collection. This smaller
positive sentiment of females disguises the disparity between how
Black women and White women are portrayed. We see that Black
females are more likely to be depicted with negative sentiment
in the Mainstream books, whereas White women are more often
portrayed with positive sentiment. Because U.S. children’s books
include more White women than Black women as characters, this
may conceal the more negative intersectional portrayals of Black
women in society.
Figure 3: Sentiment of Characters by Gender, Over Time
(a) Mainstream
(b) Diversity
Note: This figure shows the average sentiment of female and male
famous figures over time across all books.
We show how average sentiment of females and males has changed
over time in each collection in Figure 3. A century ago, women were
much less positively spoken about than men, but the difference in
the average sentiment of females and males has decreased over the
decades. In the Mainstream collection (cf. Panel A), the average
sentiments between females and males have converged over time.In the Diversity collection (cf. Panel B), average sentiment towards
females has remained similar, but the average sentiment of how
males have been depicted has decreased over time. Both females
and males have been depicted positively on average in each decade.
Figure 4: Sentiment of Characters by Race, Over Time
(a) Mainstream
(b) Diversity
Note: This figure shows the average sentiment of Black and White
famous figures over time across all books.
In Figure 4, we show how average sentiment of females and males
has changed over time in each collection. The patterns differ across
the Mainstream and Diversity collections. Average sentiment of
Black characters in the Mainstream collection was extremely low
100 years ago, especially relative to average sentiment of White
characters, but it has increased over time, especially in the last three
decades (cf. Panel A). The difference in sentiment connected with
Black people and White people has also decreased over time, but
there still remains a substantial gap.
By contrast, the average sentiment of Black and White characters
was more similar at the advent of the Diversity collection. The
average sentiment of each group has decreased over the decades,
but the difference between the groups has increased (cf. Panel B).
In both collections, White characters are generally more likely to
be positively depicted than Black characters.
5.2 Local Beliefs and Book Consumption
The messages in books purchased reflect the beliefs of consumers.
These individuals – and their associated beliefs – comprise their
Note: This figure shows the average sentiment of female and male
famous figures over time across all books.
We show how average sentiment of females and males has changed
over time in each collection in Figure 3. A century ago, women were
much less positively spoken about than men, but the difference in
the average sentiment of females and males has decreased over the
decades. In the Mainstream collection (cf. Panel A), the average
sentiments between females and males have converged over time.
In the Diversity collection (cf. Panel B), average sentiment towardsfemales has remained similar, but the average sentiment of how
males have been depicted has decreased over time. Both females
and males have been depicted positively on average in each decade.
Figure 4: Sentiment of Characters by Race, Over Time
(a) Mainstream
(b) Diversity
Note: This figure shows the average sentiment of Black and White
famous figures over time across all books.
In Figure 4, we show how average sentiment of females and males
has changed over time in each collection. The patterns differ across
the Mainstream and Diversity collections. Average sentiment of
Black characters in the Mainstream collection was extremely low
100 years ago, especially relative to average sentiment of White
characters, but it has increased over time, especially in the last three
decades (cf. Panel A). The difference in sentiment connected with
Black people and White people has also decreased over time, but
there still remains a substantial gap.
By contrast, the average sentiment of Black and White characters
was more similar at the advent of the Diversity collection. The
average sentiment of each group has decreased over the decades,
but the difference between the groups has increased (cf. Panel B).
In both collections, White characters are generally more likely to
be positively depicted than Black characters.
5.2 Local Beliefs and Book Consumption
The messages in books purchased reflect the beliefs of consumers.
These individuals – and their associated beliefs – comprise their
25Portrayals of Race and Gender: Sentiment in 100 Years of Children’s Literature COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA
local societies. We examine the relationship between book pur-
chases and local beliefs to understand the potential messages being
transmitted to children in different parts of society. In particular, we
draw from the 2017 Cooperative Election Study (CCES), a nation-
ally representative survey administered by YouGov.10The survey
collects information about general political attitudes and demo-
graphics. We merge these data with the number of books from
the Mainstream and Diversity collections purchased by zip code
between 2017-2020 using data from the Numerator Omnipanel data,
a consumer panel data set. These data include information from
over 1 billion shopping trips from over 44,000 retailers.
Table 2: Beliefs and Book Consumption, Sentiment by Race
Dependent variable:
% of Respondents who somewhat or strongly agree
White people in the U.S.
have certain advantages because
of the color of their skinI am angry that
racism exists
(1) (2)
Sentiment of 0.131∗0.176∗∗∗
Black characters (0.076) (0.060)
Sentiment of −0.077 −0.087
White characters (0.076) (0.060)
Constant 55.871∗∗∗80.234∗∗∗
(0.293) (0.232)
Observations 17,930 17,930
Adjusted R20.0001 0.0005
Note: Data on beliefs at the zip code level are drawn from the
2017 Cooperative Election Study Common Content Survey [42].
Data on children’s book purchases at the zip code level are drawn
from the 2017-2020 Numerator Omnipanel. Variables containing
percentages are scaled so that potential values range from 0−100.
∗p<0.1;∗∗∗p<0.01
In Table 2, we show that more purchases of books with positive
sentiment towards Black characters are associated with a larger
proportion of individuals who believe that White people in the
United States have certain advantages because of the color of their
skin (column 1) and who are angry that racism exists (column
2). When examining this pattern by race-gender, we see that a
larger proportion of books that depict Black males positively are
purchased in areas where a larger proportion of individuals report
being angry that racism exists. As a placebo check, we separately
examine this pattern by gender. and we see no differences between
sentiment of females versus sentiment of males.
These relationships may be driven by several potential explanations.
For example, higher consumption of books with positive sentiment
towards Black characters might be driven by demographic compo-
sition or other contemporaneous factors that may have affected
10CCES was formerly known as the Cooperative Congressional Election Study.beliefs. These patterns reflect correlations and do not represent
causal evidence.
6 CONCLUSION
The way that people from different backgrounds are portrayed in
content given to children can shape and influence children’s beliefs
about people from those backgrounds. We measure the sentiment
associated with the sentences in which race-gender identities are
depicted in award-winning children’s books from the last century
in the United States. The measure of “sentiment” captures a feeling
of positivity or negativity towards characters of different racial
groups or genders.
We examine the books in two different collections: Mainstream
books, those that are commonly found in schools or homes, and
Diversity books, which explicitly center underrepresented identities.
Mainstream books are more likely to be bought or checked out than
other children’s books, which suggests that children are more likely
to be exposed to the messages in them. Therefore, it is useful to
understand the messages being transmitted in these books, and
thus the potential relationship between exposure and beliefs.
Books that center underrepresented identities are more likely to
portray characters of all identities with positive sentiment. The
sentiment associated with women is positive on average; however,
Black women are more often portrayed with negative sentiment in
Mainstream books, while White women are more often portrayed
with positive sentiment. Children’s books in the U.S. depict more
White women overall, so this average positive sentiment for women
overall conceal the more negative intersectional portrayals of Black
women. Women were much less positively written about than men
100 years ago, but the average sentiment of females and males has
converged over time.
We then analyze the relationship between book purchases and local
beliefs to understand the potential messages being transmitted to
children in different parts of society. We see suggestive evidence
that more purchases of books with positive sentiment towards Black
characters are associated with a larger proportion of individuals
who believe that White people in the United States have certain
advantages because of the color of their skin and who are angry
that racism exists. These associations may be driven by various
contemporaneous factors that may have affected beliefs.
This work is particularly relevant to approaches and research that
address challenges faced by marginalized, underrepresented, or
misrepresented communities. This work brings together insights
from multiple disciplines including computer science, the social
sciences, and the humanities in order to address key challenges for
sustainable societies such as equity, education, poverty, accessibility,
and economic growth. Understanding the messages that may be
implicitly – or explicitly – sent to children through highly influential
books can lend insight into the factors that may shape children’s
beliefs and attitudes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
For financial support, we thank Becker-Friedman Institute at
UChicago, Center for Data and Applied Computing at UChicago,
and UChicago Career Advancement. The research reported here
was also supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
26COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA Anjali Adukia, Callista Christ, Anjali Das, and Ayush Raj
Department of Education, through Grant R305A200478 to the Uni-
versity of Chicago. The opinions expressed are those of the authors
and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of
Education. For excellent research assistance, we thank Juan Miguel
Jimenez, Avery Schoen, Celia Zhu, and Umama Zillur. For very
helpful feedback, we thank Patricia Chiril, Alex Eble, Emileigh Har-
rison, Hakizumwami Birali Runesha, and David Uminsky. We thank
the UChicago Research Computing Center for access to computa-
tional resources. Researchers’ own analyses calculated (or derived)
based in part on data from Market Track, LLC dba Numerator and
marketing databases provided through the Numerator Datasets at
the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of
Chicago Booth School of Business. The conclusions drawn from
the Numerator data are those of the researchers and do not reflect
the views of Numerator. Numerator is not responsible for and had
no role in analyzing or preparing the results reported herein.
REFERENCES
[1]Anjali Adukia, Callista Christ, Anjali Das, Alex Eble, Emileigh Harrison, and Hak-
izumwami Birali Runesha. 2022. Category Embeddings Measure Intersectional
Portrayals of Race and Gender. Working Paper (2022).
[2]Anjali Adukia, Alex Eble, Emileigh Harrison, Hakizumwami Birali Runesha, and
Teodora Szasz. 2021. What We Teach About Race and Gender: Representation
in Images and Text of Children’s Books. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 29123 (2021).
[3]Apoorv Agarwal, Boyi Xie, Ilia Vovsha, Owen Rambow, and Rebecca J Passonneau.
2011. Sentiment analysis of twitter data. Proceedings of the Workshop on Language
in Social Media (LSM) (2011), 30–38.
[4] Kwame Alexander. 2019. The crossover . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
[5]Alexandra Balahur, Ralf Steinberger, Mijail Kabadjov, Vanni Zavarella, Erik Van
Der Goot, Matina Halkia, Bruno Pouliquen, and Jenya Belyaeva. 2013. Sentiment
analysis in the news. arXiv preprint arXiv:1309.6202 (2013).
[6]Lin Bian, Sarah-Jane Leslie, and Andrei Cimpian. 2017. Gender stereotypes about
intellectual ability emerge early and influence children’s interests. Science 355,
6323 (2017), 389–391.
[7]Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009. Natural language processing
with Python: Analyzing text with the natural language toolkit . O’Reilly Media,
Inc.
[8]Francine D Blau and Lawrence M Kahn. 2017. The gender wage gap: Extent,
trends, and explanations. Journal of Economic Literature 55, 3 (2017), 789–865.
[9]Jerry Boucher and Charles E Osgood. 1969. The pollyanna hypothesis. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 8, 1 (1969), 1–8.
[10] Davide Cantoni, Yuyu Chen, David Y Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Y Jane Zhang.
2017. Curriculum and ideology. Journal of Political Economy 125, 2 (2017),
338–392.
[11] Alexander Cappelen, John List, Anya Samek, and Bertil Tungodden. 2020. The
effect of early-childhood education on social preferences. Journal of Political
Economy 128, 7 (2020), 2739–2758.
[12] Marlaina Cockcroft. 2018. Caldecott and Newbery Medal wins bring instant
boost to book sales. School Library Journal 64, 2 (2018). https://www.slj.com/
?detailStory=caldecott-newbery-medals-translate-bigger-short-term-sales
[13] Combahee River Collective. 1983. The Combahee River Collective Statement.
Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology 1 (1983), 264–274.
[14] Kimberlé Crenshaw. 1989. Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex:
A black feminist critique of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist theory and
antiracist politics. University of Chicago Legal Forum 1989, 8 (1989), 139.
[15] Kimberlé Crenshaw. 1990. Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity
politics, and violence against women of color. Stanford Law Review 43 (1990),
1241.
[16] William A Darity and Patrick L Mason. 1998. Evidence on discrimination in
employment: Codes of color, codes of gender. Journal of Economic Perspectives
12, 2 (1998), 63–90.
[17] Kathy Davis. 2008. Intersectionality as buzzword: A sociology of science per-
spective on what makes a feminist theory successful. Feminist Theory 9, 1 (2008),
67–85.
[18] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT:
Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding.
arXiv e-prints , Article arXiv:1810.04805 (Oct. 2018), arXiv:1810.04805 pages.
arXiv:1810.04805 [cs.CL]
[19] Peter Sheridan Dodds, Eric M Clark, Suma Desu, Morgan R Frank, Andrew J
Reagan, Jake Ryland Williams, Lewis Mitchell, Kameron Decker Harris, Isabel MKloumann, James P Bagrow, et al .2015. Human language reveals a universal
positivity bias. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112, 8 (2015),
2389–2394.
[20] Jeanette Eaton. 1944. Lone journey: The life of Roger Williams . Harcourt Brace.
[21] Alex Eble and Feng Hu. 2019. Does primary school duration matter? Evaluating
the consequences of a large Chinese policy experiment. Economics of Education
Review 70 (2019), 61–74.
[22] Joe R. Feagin and Debra Van Ausdale. 2001. The first R: How children learn race
and racism . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
[23] Russell Freedman. 2011. The voice that challenged a nation: Marian Anderson and
the struggle for equal rights . Sandpiper/Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
[24] Jane Cooley Fruehwirth and Jessica Gagete-Miranda. 2019. Your peers’ parents:
Spillovers from parental education. Economics of Education Review 73 (Dec. 2019),
101910. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0272775719301219
[25] Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln and Paolo Masella. 2016. Long-lasting effects of socialist
education. Review of Economics and Statistics 98, 3 (2016), 428–441.
[26] Negin Ghavami, Dalal Katsiaficas, and Leoandra Onnie Rogers. 2016. Toward
an intersectional approach in developmental science: The role of race, gender,
sexual orientation, and immigrant status. In Advances in Child Development and
Behavior . Vol. 50. Elsevier, 31–73.
[27] Clarence Green. 2017. Introducing the Corpus of the Canon of Western Literature:
A corpus for culturomics and stylistics. Language and Literature 26, 4 (2017),
282–299.
[28] M Honnibal and I Montani. 2017. Natural language understanding with Bloom
embeddings, convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing. Unpub-
lished software application (2017). https://spacy.io
[29] Yi Hu and Wenjie Li. 2011. Document sentiment classification by exploring
description model of topical terms. Computer Speech & Language 25, 2 (2011),
386–403.
[30] Irene Hunt. 1994. Up a road slowly . Library of Congress, NLS/BPH.
[31] Clayton J. Hutto and Eric Gilbert. 2014. VADER: A Parsimonious Rule-Based
Model for Sentiment Analysis of Social Media Text. ICWSM (2014).
[32] Arthur M. Jacobs, Berenike Herrmann, Gerhard Lauer, Jana Lüdtke, and Sascha
Schroeder. 2020. Sentiment Analysis of Children and Youth Literature: Is There
a Pollyanna Effect? Frontiers in Psychology 11 (2020), 2310. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fpsyg.2020.574746
[33] Melanie D Koss and Kathleen A Paciga. 2020. Diversity in Newbery Medal-
winning titles: A content analysis. Journal of Language and Literacy Education
16, 2 (2020), n2.
[34] Robert J Lennox, Diogo Veríssimo, William M Twardek, Colin R Davis, and Ivan
Jarić. 2020. Sentiment analysis as a measure of conservation culture in scientific
literature. Conservation Biology 34, 2 (2020), 462–471.
[35] Steven Loria. 2018. textblob Documentation. Release 0.15 2 (2018).
[36] Saif M Mohammad. 2012. From once upon a time to happily ever after: Tracking
emotions in mail and books. Decision Support Systems 53, 4 (2012), 730–741.
[37] Natalia Nollenberger, Núria Rodríguez-Planas, and Almudena Sevilla. 2016. The
math gender gap: The role of culture. American Economic Review 106, 5 (2016),
257–61.
[38] Brendan O’Flaherty. 2015. The Economics of Race in the United States . Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA.
[39] Claudia Olivetti, Eleonora Patacchini, and Yves Zenou. 2020. Mothers, peers, and
gender-role identity. Journal of the European Economic Association 18, 1 (2020),
266–301.
[40] Catherine Porter and Danila Serra. 2020. Gender differences in the choice of
major: The importance of female role models. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 12, 3 (2020), 226–54.
[41] Huaxia Rui, Yizao Liu, and Andrew Whinston. 2013. Whose and what chatter
matters? The effect of tweets on movie sales. Decision Support Systems 55, 4
(2013), 863–870.
[42] Brian Schaffner and Stephen Ansolabhere. 2019. 2017 CCES Common Content.
https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/3STEZY
[43] Robert S Siegler, Judy S DeLoache, and Nancy Eisenberg. 2003. How children
develop . Macmillan.
[44] Vicky Smith. 2013. The ‘Caldecott effect’. Children and Libraries: The Journal of
the Association for Library Service to Children 1, 1 (2013), 9–13.
[45] Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Andrew Ng, and Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive Deep Models for
Semantic Compositionality Over a Sentiment Treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . 1631–1642.
[46] Valery Solovyev, Marina Solnyshkina, Elzara Gafiyatova, Danielle McNamara,
and Vladimir Ivanov. 2019. Sentiment in academic texts. 2019 24th Conference of
Open Innovations Association (FRUCT), IEEE (2019), 408–414.
[47] Zijun Sun, Chun Fan, Qinghong Han, Xiaofei Sun, Yuxian Meng, Fei Wu, and
Jiwei Li. 2020. Self-explaining structures improve nlp models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.01786 (2020).
[48] Teresa Sylvester, Mario Braun, David Schmidtke, and Arthur M Jacobs. 2016.
The Berlin affective word list for children (kidBAWL): exploring processing of
affective lexical semantics in the visual and auditory modalities. Frontiers in
27Portrayals of Race and Gender: Sentiment in 100 Years of Children’s Literature COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA
Psychology 7 (2016), 969.
[49] Fu Xianghua, Liu Guo, Guo Yanyan, and Wang Zhiqiang. 2013. Multi-aspect
sentiment analysis for Chinese online social reviews based on topic modeling
and HowNet lexicon. Knowledge-Based Systems 37 (2013), 186–195.
[50] Amy Zhao Yu, Shahar Ronen, Kevin Hu, Tiffany Lu, and César A Hidalgo. 2016.
Pantheon 1.0, a manually verified dataset of globally famous biographies. ScientificData 3, 1 (2016), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2015.75
[51] Liang-Chih Yu, Jheng-Long Wu, Pei-Chann Chang, and Hsuan-Shou Chu. 2013.
Using a contextual entropy model to expand emotion words and their intensity
for the sentiment classification of stock market news. Knowledge-Based Systems
41 (2013), 89–97.
28