AN AUDIOVISUAL ORIENTATION TO ACADEMIC COMPUTING SERVICES 
Leslie J. McCain 
Senior Applications Analyst, User Services 
SUNY at Buffalo 
INTRODUCTION 
As computer usage permeates every academic discipline, demands on Academic 
Computing Services (ACS) are rapidly increasing. Unfortunately, people are not 
always aware of the role this unit performs in the university community. As a 
result, they may be disappointed in the types of assistance they do (and do not) 
receive. 
Learning to use computers, or to use them in a new environment, is 
sufficiently demanding without the extra burden of misunderstandings about the 
nature of ACS. At SUNY/Buffalo, ACS is trying to reduce these problems by 
reaching out and teaching students and faculty about what we are and what we do. 
The newest part of this outreach is a slide-tape audiovisual program. 
The purpose of this paper is to share some of our experiences in creating 
this audiovisual tool. The first section provides background on SUNY at Buffalo 
in general, and on factors facilitating misconceptions about ACS in particular. 
Then steps taken in the past to bridge this knowledge gap, and the limitations 
of these measures, are outlined. Advantages of the present solution, the AV 
program, are identified. The process and costs of producing the program are 
described. Finally, reflections on this experience are summarized. 
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted 
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct 
commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the 
publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is 
by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy 
otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
0 1985 ACM 0-89791-167-9/85/0010/0021 $00.75 
Pulling It All Together ACM-SIGUCCS XIII, 1985 - 21McCain 
BACKGROUND 
The University 
SUNY at Buffalo is one of four university centers in the State of New York 
higher education system. Its mandate is to concentrate on upper-division and 
graduate programs. The University at Buffalo is also the largest of the 
university centers, with an enrollment of over 24,000 students. Faculties 
include not only the traditional arts and sciences divisions of Arts and 
Letters, Natural Sciences and Mathematics, and Social Sciences, but also schools 
of Architecture, Dentistry, Education, Engineering, Health Related Professions, 
Library Studies, Law, Management, Medicine, Nursing, and Social Work. 
These diverse programs are housed in the City of Buffalo and the adjoining 
suburb of Amherst. The old campus in the city is being converted into a health 
sciences center. A large, new campus in the suburbs is nearing completion. And 
an "interim campus" is being phased out. Several departments will remain 
isolated in buildings scattered throughout the city. 
Currently most computing offices are located in the interim campus, 
approximately five miles from the old "south campus" and three miles from the 
new "north campus". A new computing center in the suburban campus will be 
occupied sometime this fall. When Computing Services moves, its staff will be 
among the last to perform their daily responsibilities in the midst of the new 
"campus for today and tomorrowll. 
The Problem 
Over the past few years the number and significance of decentralized, 
"satellite" computing sites close to major user groups has increased. 
Nevertheless, as other units have moved into their new quarters, much of the 
computing services staff has become physically separated from its users. At the 
same time, the nature of campus computing has transformed radically from a 
single-vendor mainframe to a distributed computing operation incorporating 
micros, minis, and mainframes. In addition, the makeup of the user community 
has changed as computer usage reaches into every academic discipline. 
This combination of physical separation, diversification of computing 
facilities, and increase in novice users has generated several problems. One 
recurring dilemma is that students and faculty often do not know the purposes 
and functions of Academic Computing Services (ACS). As a result, these people 
request nonexistent types of assistance; they overlook relevant facilities; they 
have no idea of the amount and type of material they will have to master in 
order to accomplish their computing goals; they come too late to make effective 
use of available resources. They, and the front-line user services providers, 
become frustrated with each other's requests and responses. 
Past Solutions 
ACS has been taking steps to reduce these types of misunderstandings among 
long-standing and new users. The general approach has been to reach out and 
teach people about what we are and what we do. Several types of outreach have 
been attempted in the past few years. Each has its corresponding limitations. 
22AV Orientation to ACS 
One strategy has been publishing newsletter articles describing the computing 
center's services and expectations. Titles have included "Do's and Don'ts for 
Using ACS Services" and "Planning to Graduate? Plan Ahead!". However, primary 
departmental contacts (department chairpersons and mainframe computer account 
coordinators) do not always circulate the newsletters, so many users don't see 
them. And, of course, everyone who sees a copy doesn't necessarily read it. 
Another approach has been to lftrain the trainers". This has included holding 
special courses on operating systems, editors, etc. for teaching assistants and 
reviewing course handouts. While a very close relationship has been established 
with the Computer Science Department, response from other parts of the 
university has been minimal. 
The Director of ACS initiated meetings in many academic departments. These 
gatherings provided an opportunity to describe current facilities and major 
changes ahead, answer questions, and listen to issues raised by faculty. But 
soon afterwards a faculty member from one of those very departments is likely to 
suggest that the computing center visits with them. Were they not notified? 
Or, did they simply not notice the invitation when it was extended? On the 
other hand, some departments would not even attempt to schedule these exchanges. 
User Services usually responds to requests by graduate seminars, the new 
faculty orientation program, etc. to provide an overview of ACS. Again, each 
presentation reaches only a small number of potential users. In addition, few 
user services staff members enjoy doing these types of presentations. 
A year ago User Services started mailing directly to all full and part-time 
faculty and professional staff (approximately 3,000 people). To date these 
mailings have been limited to the mainframe and minicomputer tlshort courseM 
schedule. However, the strategy has finally broken through the barrier which 
seems to exist when only a few key people in each department receive ACS 
materials. This procedure also helps compensate for the irregularity with which 
the university newspaper reports ACS short course offerings in its calendar. 
While directly mailing short course flyers consistently acquaints faculty and 
staff with one important activity, ACS still needs a method to familiarize these 
people with its full range of services. In addition, establishing a procedure 
for systematically reaching students is necessary for ACS to effectively fulfill 
its mission. 
THE PRESENT SOLUTION 
Freshmen Orientation 
One place 'where large numbers of students could be contacted each year is 
Freshmen Orientation. This three-day campus visit is held each summer during 
June and July. Freshmen live on-campus taking placement tests, registering for 
their first courses, learning about school services and facilities. For years 
the University Libraries have made a brief presentation during this program. 
Why couldn't ACS as well? 
23McCain 
When the directors of Freshmen Orientation were asked this question, the 
answer was "Yes, if . ..'I. Yes, if the computing center could deliver a 
presentation that would be sufficiently interesting. This meant stimulating for 
eighteen-year-olds, at 8:15 in the morning, after the students had slept for 
about six hours on the night before, their first evening staying in the 
university dorm. 
Yes, if the computing center had the personnel to deliver this presentation 9 
- 18 times. There would be 9 presentations if all 250 students per session saw 
the program at the same time. There would be 18 presentations if students were 
broken up into groups of 125. 
Yes, if the computing center could deliver its message in lo-15 minutes. 
The computing center decided that Orientation '85 was an important 
opportunity to orient a significant part of the university community to ACS. 
Therefore it accepted the challenge of designing a suitable presentation. The 
approach that best seemed to meet orientation's conditions was a prerecorded 
audio-visual program. 
Advantages of Audiovisual 
A synchronized AV program can relay considerable material in a short period 
of time. 
A program with photographs as well as audio components enables visual 
recognition of computing facilities once students start exploring the campus on 
their own. 
Successful delivery of a prerecorded program is less dependent on the skills 
and knowledge of the person representing computing services. Presentation 
quality is more uniform. But also, the pool of potential presenters is larger. 
And those who participate are less likely to burn out. 
Another benefit from creating a prerecorded AV' program for Freshmen 
Orientation is its utility in other university activities: open houses, 
seminars, faculty orientation, etc. 
A written viewer guide can be distributed to everyone watching the program. 
This summarizes important points, so people don't have to take notes, Such a 
document can contain details (like room numbers and phone numbers) that should 
not be included in the AV materials. In addition, handouts can be targeted to 
particular needs of different audiences. 
Advantages of Slide-Tape 
Constraints imposed by the nature of Freshmen Orientation were not the only 
factors impinging on media selection. Other facets of the university 
environment also affected the feasibility of potential delivery methods. 
Therefore, the type of AV recording was an issue. 
The format selected here was a slide carousel synchronized to an audio tape. 
It is useful to review these other considerations and how slide-tape resolves 
24AV Orientation to ACS 
them. 
The ability to modify the program was an important feature. Between the end 
of production and the program's first use an inter-university committee would 
announce its choice for a new mainframe. This new machine will replace the 
current mainframe within the year. In addition, computing services plans to 
move into its new building within four months of Orientation '85. The AV 
program will need to be altered to reflect these major changes in the computing 
environment. 
A slide carousel synchronized to an audio tape can be updated easily. 
Individual slides can be replaced whenever a visual image needs to be changed. 
The audio tape can be resynchronized if slides are added or dropped. With a 
little more difficulty, the sound track can be rerecorded if part of the 
narration needs to be modified. 
Another concern was whether playback equipment could be set up wherever ACS 
would like to show the program. In the past three years, Lser Services has been 
repeatedly frustrated by restrictions in using videotape playback equipment. 
Specifically, groups must be brought to the few rooms where equipment is 
permanently installed. The equipment cannot be brought into regular classrooms 
or into classrooms equipped with terminals or microcomputers. 
Educational Communications Center can set up slide-tape projection equipment 
in any room in the university, The equipment will work in large lecture halls, 
small seminar rooms, on display tables (for open houses), and in the library's 
audiovisual center (for on-demand, individual playback). 
A final consideration was the expertise required by people who would set up 
and run the playback equipment. Trained AV operators would be available during 
Orientation. However, ACS staff and faculty would operate equipment when the 
program was used in other settings later in the year. 
With slide-tape, two similar versions of the program can be created. The 
more elegant version requires a sophisticated multiple-projector dissolve system 
that must be manned by AV personnel. But a slightly smaller subset of the 
visuals, with a truncated copy of the sound track, can be used whenever AV 
novices run the equipment. 
THE BEGINNINGS 
There have been several phases to developing the audiovisual introduction to 
ACS. At the writing of this paper, Freshmen Orientation has not yet occurred. 
Therefore final evaluation of the program's success is impossible. However, 
most other stages in the process have been completed: discovering the solution, 
negotiating participation, program design, program production. These activities 
are described in the next few sections. 
25McCain 
Discovering the Solution 
User Services was already receptive to the idea of producing audiovisual 
materials. Three years ago one staff member created a three-part videotape 
introduction to timesharing on the mainframe. At ACS scheduled showings alone, 
over 800 students see these tapes at the beginning of each semester. Recently 
there had been discussion of developing comparable AV courseware about the 
minicomputer systems and editors. 
On October 6, the author toured two historic sites where synchronized slide- 
tape programs were an integral part of the exhibits. Small rear-projection 
units delivered these engaging presentations easily, on-demand whenever one or 
several interested visitors appeared. 
On October 25, the university held its third annual conference on "Fostering 
Teaching Excellence". People from a broad range of units attended. The keynote 
speaker focused on the utility of AV materials in the learning process. 
Educational Communications Center (ECC) had an extensive display, with staff 
people on hand to discuss their facilities for assisting in AV design and 
production. 
Within days of attending this exhibition, the thought of using ECC's 
resources to create an AV program for Freshmen Orientation had surfaced. Jt was 
time to see if support for this idea could be gathered. Academic Computing 
Services, Freshmen Orientation, and Educational Communications Center would have 
to endorse the project. The process of eliciting support from each of these 
sources is considered next. 
Academic Computing Services 
This project was initiated from within the User Services group of ACS. 
Therefore approval began with, and was renewed periodically by, the Manager of 
User Services. Significant stages included: approaching Orientation about the 
possibility of participating; discussing design and production assistance with 
ECC; deciding to participate; creating the storyboard; producing the program; 
using the final product. At each of these turning points, agreeing to continue 
the project meant that release time from otherwise ongoing responsibilities 
would be granted. 
Other authorizations were involved as well. The Managers of User Services 
and Microcomputer Support, and the Directors of Academic Computing Services and 
University Computing Services, ratified the content of the storyboard visuals 
and narration. Several people allowed on-location photography in facilities 
under their supervision. Many people agreed to be photographed. 
Freshmen Orientation 
Clearly, the directors of Freshmen Orientation had to agree to ACS's 
participation. They were contacted by phone on October 30; the possibility was 
discussed; ACS's interest was added to the agenda of an upcoming Orientation 
advisory council meeting. 
26AV Orientation to ACS 
The advisory council sanctioned ACS's involvement. So a face-to-face meeting 
with the directors was held on December 27 to review a proposed outline. ACS 
sent a letter to these coordinators at the end of January, noting its decision 
to create the AV program for Orientation '85. A follow-up phone call in April 
reported that on-location photography was in process. ACS copy for the freshmen 
handbook was submitted on Play 8. 
From the beginning, Orientation's directors stated that actual use of the 
slide program was contingent on their approval of the final product. A 
screening for this purpose was held on June 13. The slide-tape program was 
officially accepted as part of Orientation '85. The first use date would be 
June 27. 
Educational Communications Center 
The success of this whole enterprise depended on substantial assistance from 
several areas of ECC: instructional development, graphic art, photography, 
audio production, playback services. 
After the December 27 orientation meeting, a January 10 meeting with the 
Assistant and Art Directors of ECC was scheduled. The nature of the program and 
a tentative timetable were discussed. They felt that deadlines for various 
phases of the ACS program would mesh with constraints from ongoing 
responsibilities if ECC personnel allocated Tuesdays and Thursdays to the ACS 
project. 
With this last commitment, the project was underway. 
PROGRAM DESIGN 
The most unusual part of this experience has been creating a visually-based, 
audio-coordinated storyboard. Programmers are accustomed to thinking in terms 
of terse, 7-character or less word symbols. On the other hand, initial 
specifications here would be visual images. The prospect was intriguing for 
someone who had never even taken an art appreciation course. 
An important source of optimism about the project's feasibility was the 
project director's extensive experience in leading novices through AV 
instructional design. He has detailed the process in Anderson (1980). The 
sequence is outlined roughly here. 
Preliminaries 
The jointly determined goal at this stage was a weekly meeting. The previous 
week's results would be reviewed, and a Itlesson" on the next phase would take 
place. Needless to say, several of these lessons were delivered through AV 
materials. 
The computing center was providing the ttcontent specialist". The first 
products required from this person were goals, followed by a content outline, 
and then behavioral objectives. Writing concrete objectives was difficult.McCain 
First drafts invariably stated that "the student should know . . . ". 
Media had been selected before the project began, in accordance with 
constraints identified above. As will be discussed below, the budget was not 
really an issue here. 
Initial Storyboard 
Next came creation of a rough storyboard. The routine called for creating 
visuals first. A separate sheet was used for each potential slide. Pages were 
divided into three parts: visual, instructions (to the photographer or artist), 
narration. Since drawing even crude sketches was out of the question, 
initially the visual concept was communicated through verbal directions in the 
instruction box. Sometimes plausible visuals were not forthcoming for concepts 
which needed to be included. In those cases, preliminary narration was noted. 
Once the entire visual sequence was specified, a tentative script was added 
frame-by-frame. 
Discussions were held with various people in ACS to verify that policies and 
facilities in their area of jurisdiction were portrayed accurately. 
Storyboard Revision 
At this point the art and photography directors began intensive 
participation. Each slide was painstakingly scrutinized. Visuals were proposed 
where gaps had been left in the initial storyboard. The nature of each image 
was discussed until a consensus was reached about the format for the proposed 
slide. These specialists decided that single-frame images would have a 
horizontal orientation. 
Considerable editing was performed. A carousel tray holds eighty slides. To 
fit, a quarter of the proposed visuals were eliminated. Some images were 
dropped from the story completely. Others were combined. This would require 
careful composition of certain shots, and extra lab work. But, the effect would 
add visual interest to the program. 
The introduction to ACS called for extensive on-site photography. The artist 
and photographer recommended obtaining promotional photographs of selected 
hardware. It is easy to make slides from these prints. And, the quality of 
such studio-based advertising pictures far exceeds what could be achieved on- 
location in the university. In the end, only two useful photographs were 
obtained from vendors. 
To more accurately communicate the intended visuals, an effort was made to 
find indicative photos in magazines. These clippings allowed the photographers 
to see differences in types of equipment that would be featured in various 
slides. The visual production staff found this addition to the storyboard quite 
helpful. 
Commitment 
Suddenly it was time to make a firm commitment about the program's content. 
The narration was typed in a special format and was affixed to clean storyboard 
28AV Orientation to ACS 
sheets. This revised copy was formally presented to the Managers of User 
Services and Microcomputer Support on April 5, and to the Directors of Academic 
Computing Services and University Computing Services on April II. The attached 
magazine clippings vividly displayed images anticipated for the final program. 
Enthusiastic ratification by these key ACS personnel brought the design phase to 
a close. 
At this point the storyboard was considered frozen. The whole purpose of the 
process to date was creating a storyboard that would be as acceptable at the end 
of production as it was at the beginning. It is cheap to cut and paste paper, 
but very expensive to throw out time-consuming on-location or composite slides. 
The design process seemed uneventful. The only interference arose from a 
major blizzard, travel by both the project director and the content specialist, 
and miscellaneous unanticipated conflicting obligations, which delayed or 
cancelled several early meetings. However, as we entered the production phase, 
it became clear that slippage here did have consequences. 
PROGRAM PRODUCTION 
Production work began on April 17. It was characterized by constant time 
pressures. On-site photographs required students, faculty, and entire classes 
to be accessible, and final exams would begin on Play 13. The minicomputer where 
many of the graphics would be created was scheduled for a major operating system 
upgrade on Ilay 20-21. We didn't know how stable the machine would be after it 
came back online. One of the graphics packages couldn't be tested beforehand, 
so it wasn't clear if it would work after the upgrade. Then you never knew 
whether a shot had worked until after the film was developed. It is instructive 
to look at the complications in each part of the production process. 
On-Location Photography 
Nany photographs had to capture ongoing activities. These events did not 
necessarily occur on Tuesdays and Thursdays, the days ECC assigned to the ACS 
program. This meant they had to reallocate time previously committed to other 
projects. 
All shots in a single building were scheduled for the same day. This 
coordination proved time consuming, even though most people were happy to assist 
in any way they could. 
Public sites were deserted when we arrived to take photographs of lines of 
users outside consulting offices, busy terminal rooms, and public micro areas 
filled with students of different ages, sexes, and races. Evidently we had 
selected days immediately after major projects were due. Almost no one was 
computing. We had to ask for volunteers from hallways and even from the middle 
of a class session. 
A vendor demonstration was cancelled at the last minute. Only one other 
company was scheduled to exhibit on-campus during the requisite time period. It 
took several days of phone calls to get permission from its legal department to 
29take photographs at that event. 
In one classroom, the floorplan and glare from windows precluded a 
satisfactory picture. So another instructor in a more suitably arranged room 
had to be contacted at home over the weekend to elicit permission to photograph. 
When the day for ACS's group shot arrived, we discovered the lighting in the 
academic machine room was totally inadequate. Xany fluorescent tubes from 
fixtures in the high ceiling had been removed, to eliminate glare on the 
operators' consoles. At the last minute, participants had to be talked into 
letting us photograph them in the administrative computer machine room. And the 
people had to cover up any logos or other identifying features that might 
intimate to a knowledgeable viewer that the surrounding equipment had nothing to 
do with academic computing. 
Computer Graphics 
Another major part of production was creating word slides. These images 
comprised about a third of the visuals. Throughout storyboard design, we 
envisioned creating these slides on the computing center's graphics equipment. 
When the art director reviewed the first examples, it was clear that the 
device's resolution was inadequate. A character in several locations on the 
same line looked quite different, because parts of the letter sometimes fell on 
pixel boundaries. We tried another program on an alternative device, but there 
weren't enough colors with good contrasts to meet the storyboard specifications. 
We resigned ourselves to having this artwork produced mechanically in the 
studio. 
At the last minute, three new color graphics terminals appeared at one of the 
computing facilities. They had 16.7 million colors, and they were driven by the 
easier of the two programs we had tried. By switching to a simpler font we got 
satisfactory characters. The text looked like it was drawn by a computer, but 
repetitions of a letter within a line were sufficiently uniform. Approximately 
30 slides had to be composed and photographed within a week. After several 
nights with only a few hours of sleep, this task was accomplished. 
Studio Artwork and Photography 
Studio artwork and photography were the easiest phase of the project. 
Sketches and photos could be executed whenever convenient time slots appeared. 
It was even possible to add several unplanned studio photographs to the 
storyboard toward the end of program production. 
For these components, the only demands on the content specialist were 
reviewing rough drawings and delivering required props. 
Audio 
About two-thirds of the slides were available for previewing during the 
session where the script was finalized. The resultant narrative was typed in a 
special format for use in the sound booth. 
30AV Orientation to ACS 
The audio track was produced under a very tight deadline. Narration and 
music had to be recorded during one crucial week. The narrator could not view 
the slides while he was recording, because many of them were still out for lab 
work. Neither the project director nor the content specialist was available for 
consultation during this time. 
Finally, the project director had about an hour to synchronize this audio 
material to the visuals, for the program's evaluation by personnel from 
Computing Services and Freshmen Orientation. 
Viewer Guides 
Written viewer guides are an important adjunct to the program. Initially, 
three different documents are being prepared. 
For Freshmen Orientation, ACS copy is limited to one and a half pages. The 
content is based on a document previously created for Undergraduate Advisement. 
It will be typeset and bound into a handbook. To meet the printer's deadline, 
this was submitted at the beginning of May. 
For Faculty Orientation, ACS may fill up to six pages. This document is 
being written from scratch. It is due at the end of June. The material will be 
used as is, in a looseleaf notebook. 
For other situations, an extensive outline is being prepared. It corresponds 
closely to the audio and visual content of each frame. This handout will 
contain some details which were not suitable for inclusion in the slides or 
narration, but which potential users need to know. 
Putting It All Together 
Once all individual components were produced, three final steps remained: 
equipment scheduling, refinement and duplication. 
Appropriate equipment and operators had to be scheduled for evaluative 
previews and the actual Orientation presentations. A special screening for 
everyone who assisted with the program was postponed until the beginning of the 
fall term. 
Both audio and video refinement were necessary. Some visuals were paced too 
close together. Such synchronization problems could be satisfactorily resolved 
before the program's first use at Orientation '85. A few of the visuals looked 
weak, when viewed in context of the other images. Redoing them would have to 
wait until later in the summer. 
After these fine tunings are completed, duplicates must be manufactured. ECC 
will retain the visual and audio masters for safekeeping. Each circulating set 
will include two audio tapes and a typed copy of the script, because cassette 
tapes sometimes break during presentations. Reproductions will be created for 
internal use by Computing Services, on-demand individual viewing in the AV 
Center in the University Libraries, and classroom or conference screenings 
scheduled through ECC's Media Library. A few copies will work with a multiple- 
projector dissolve system. Most sets will run in the simpler single-carousel 
31McCain 
projector. 
COSTS 
The costs for this project may be broken down into three categories: money, 
time, and services. 
The direct monetary costs are minimal. Departments in the university are 
considered state agencies. This means ACS pays directly only for supplies. To 
date the twenty-five rolls of thirty-six exposure film (and their processing) 
have cost approximately $250. Duplication costs have not yet been estimated. 
Time outlays were the major costs, and the pace of time expenditures varied 
throughout the life of the project. The content specialist spent only about one 
day per week from mid-January through mid-April. From mid-April through mid- 
June, however, three or more days (and sometimes very late nights) were the 
norm. 
Approximate totals for key ECC personnel were: project director, 60 hours; 
art director, 60 hours; photographers, 40 hours; graphic artist, 10 hours; audio 
producer, 20 hours. If charges had been assessed for this labor, ECC estimates 
the total dollar cost would have reached $5,000 - $6,000. Such an amount is 
quite inexpensive in comparison with current commercial rates. 
Students and faculty paid a very real indirect cost from the loss of some 
otherwise routine user services. The content specialist was released from her 
normal short-course teaching commitments during both the spring and the summer 
terms. Some graduate students had been counting on the availability of those 
courses to get them started on their thesis work, 
Other people simply could not get the telephone or in-person consulting they 
needed during the intensive two-month production period. The fact that this 
reduction in services was unanticipated was little consolation to those people 
whose problems could not wait until usual office hours were reestablished. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Now that the program has completed its preliminary evaluations, it is 
possible to reflect back on and summarize the experience. It seems clear that 
the major goal of this project, directly acquainting large numbers of students 
with what ACS is and does, will be achieved. Benefits from this process will 
accrue to both the university community and ACS. 
Interestingly, the very act of eliciting cooperation for many of the on-site 
photographs expanded several faculty members' understandings of ACS's 
activities. 
We now know that the volume of students likely to be reached by the program 
far exceeds initial expectations. Not only 1,500 - 2,000 freshmen, but also 
32AV Orientation to ACS 
several thousand upperclassmen waiting in drop/add registration lines are likely 
to see the audiovisual ACS orientation between June and September. With only 
minor revisions, the presentation can reach a comparable number of students next 
year as well. 
Another important audience for the program has surfaced since this project 
began. The audience is the university administration. And the purpose of 
addressing them is for ACS to establish the breadth and importance of its 
mission. 
In the past few years, ACS has not needed to actively market itself. The 
explosive demand for computing power from all facets of the university community 
has effectively assured adequate computing funding. Now that the national tax 
reform debate has begun in earnest, the situation has changed. The University 
at Buffalo is part of a public higher education system in the state with the 
highest personal income taxes. While eliminating individual deductions for 
state and local taxes is only one of many proposals, the fact that this feature 
has even been advanced demands some attention from otherwise secure units like 
computing services. Judiciously screening the audiovisual orientation can 
assist ACS in its increasingly important task of actively justifying allocations 
of scarce dollar resources to centralized computing facilities. 
Another benefit to User Services has been the discovery, during on-location 
photography, of an audio-visual learning facility in the Undergraduate Library. 
The mainframe videotapes, the ACS slide-tape program, and several videotape 
courses previously used only for internal ACS training can be made available on- 
demand to the general user community. The centrality of UGL's AV Center makes 
it worthwhile for ACS to search out other audiovisual products to augment 
instructor-based and computer-based short course offerings.' 
ACS's success with this AV production does not imply that it will enter 
lightly into any future audiovisual development ventures. 
One persistent concern is the element of risk involved in the process. You 
simply don't know until the very end whether the numerous pieces fit together 
into an effective whole. You make an extensive investment with little assurance 
of the final product's quality. 
Another issue is the staff time lost to other projects. This cost cannot be 
absorbed under all conditions. Thus, while initial positive reviews have 
confirmed the validity of this particular project, there also is an increased 
willingness to purchase moderately priced, reasonable quality AV products 
created elsewhere. 
An audiovisual orientation would not be appropriate in all other university 
settings. At schools where communicating with users is not problematic, or 
where the volume of users is much smaller, it is difficult to justify the cost 
of staff time. In cases where the computing center has to pay for audiovisual 
staff services, this kind of a project undoubtedly is out of the question. 
Nevertheless, the apparent success of this project indicates that programmers 
with no previous AV experience can effectively author audiovisual "software". 
User Services departments should seriously evaluate the potential of this 
33McCain 
approach for meeting their specific educational objectives. 
REFERENCES 
Anderson, J. A. (1980) Developing a model for consulting skills in 
instructional development. Unpublished paper, Educational Communications 
Center, State University of New York at Buffalo. 
34