institutions have a profound influence on prosocial 
behavior, as does FRS.
A widely accepted definition of religion is that “it is a 
system of symbols by means of which people (a 
community) orient themselves in the world with reference 
to both ordinary and extraordinary powers, meanings, 
and values” [1]. The traditions, symbols, and rituals 
associated with religion play an important role in society 
and continue to shape many people’s identities and 
interactions. Faith is then considered the interpretative 
element within a religious experience that can also be 
considered a form of knowledge [2].
In their empirical study comparing definitions of 
religiousness and spirituality, Zinnbauer et al. state that 
“spirituality was most often described in personal or 
experiential terms, such as belief in God or a higher power, 
or having a relationship with God or a higher power” [3]. 
They considered religiousness  and spirituality to be Faith, religion, and spirituality (FRS) are contentious 
areas in human-computer interaction (HCI) and design. 
As HCI researchers strive to cultivate rigor and validity in 
practice, the influence of FRS carries more weight in some 
areas of the field. One such area is design for prosocial 
behavior, or prosocial design. We agree that FRS is not a 
necessary factor to elicit or support prosocial behavior; 
however, we maintain that it is an area warranting further 
exploration into the richness of ancient wisdom and 
traditions that resonate with many people in different 
ways and can offer potential opportunities for rich and 
meaningful experiences within HCI and design.
Prosocial behavior or prosociality is voluntary action 
that is performed with the intention to help or benefit 
others. Prosocial behavior manifests itself in many forms, 
for example, volunteerism, charitable giving, cooperation, 
caring, or simply doing something good for someone. 
Policy and legal systems and many value-shaping 
F
Insights
 →Prosocial HCI and design research need to be inclusive of FRS-based values, motives, and rituals.
 →It is necessary to foster unbiased design research practices that capture people’s FRS values.
 →Design practice should reflect the ways of knowing as found in FRS-based systems that influence human motives and 
conduct.Making Space for 
Faith, Religion, 
and Spirituality in 
Prosocial HCI
  Khushnood Naqshbandi, Kristina Mah,  and  
Naseem Ahmadpour, University of SydneyDIALOGUES  STANDPOINT
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
JULY–AUGUST 2022   INTERACTIONS   63[4]. However, there is limited precedent in HCI to 
specifically support design for FRS-based prosocial 
behaviors. It is thus challenging to be inclusive of FRS 
practices in design for technology-mediated prosocial 
behaviors such as digital volunteerism when the HCI space 
is predominantly secularized, and hardly any discourse on 
faith exists.
PROSOCIALITY AND COMPASSION
Kristina Mah: Responding to loneliness and anxiety 
becoming the modern day epidemics of our times, my research 
explores opportunities within Buddhist philosophy that offer 
methods to alleviate this human suffering, and that can be 
translated to the design of “compassion driven” interactive 
systems. I   a large-scale interactive installation (Figure 1) for 
a public festival that explored how tangible and intangible 
aspects of Tibetan Buddhist ritual interaction could be used as 
inspiration to design a digital experience and playfully engage 
visitors in a narrative of generosity and well-wishing in a 
public space [5]. The theoretical basis of this concept-driven 
design research was grounded in concepts from Tibetan 
Mahayana Buddhist philosophy and traditional ritual 
practices, exploring how to transform key principles and 
practices of Buddhist ritual for compassion cultivation into a 
large-scale physical installation in a secular setting.
Many concepts that are found in religious traditions—
empathy, compassion, forgiveness, gratitude, among many 
others—have been empirically shown to facilitate 
prosocial behaviors. Compassion, for instance, a major 
theme in religious and secular philosophy, can be a strong 
motivator for prosocial behavior.
Faith and spirituality are also linked to well-being and 
happiness in research findings. Many people associate 
FRS-based identities with positive experiences and 
long-term happiness. HCI has sought inspiration from 
some of these concepts such as gratitude [6,7] and 
compassion [5], and presented them in a secularized 
manner or context. Given the current trend in HCI that 
focuses on well-being and its predictors, engaging FRS in 
HCI design practices is beneficial and can foster well-being 
for many people who share FRS value systems.different concepts, yet not independent of each other, and 
both definitions were concerned with integrating one’s 
values and beliefs with one’s behavior in daily life.
In this article, we present critical reflections on various 
aspects of FRS by lead researchers on two independent 
research case studies. These case studies can be viewed in 
the space of prosocial HCI and design with embedded 
aspects of FRS. This is followed by discussion of points 
presented in those reflections by all coauthors. We put 
forward considerations in the form of provocations for 
how to foreground influence and inspiration from FRS in 
research and development in prosocial design to respond 
to values important to many people around the world. We 
additionally propose consolidated opportunities and 
challenges from these cases.
PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR  
AND FRS IN HCI AND DESIGN
Khushnood Naqshbandi: As an HCI researcher, when I 
describe my main research interest, designing for digital 
volunteerism, it tends to invoke varied responses. Some 
audiences show interest in discussions of free digital labor and 
liberal economy, while others are enthralled by the 
motivational psychology associated with digital volunteering. I 
also receive questions about the participatory aspects of my 
research with volunteers. In one of my talks, though, I was 
stumped by a simple comment from an audience member, who 
came up to me after the presentation. He mentioned how his 
motivation to volunteer is based on his deep religious faith, and 
asked if my research mentioned anything about faith-based 
motivation for volunteering.
Many digital platforms aim to engage people in 
prosocial behaviors such as volunteer work, charity, 
philanthropy, and mutual aid, among many others. This is 
reflected in HCI research on how digital platforms may 
support work performed by volunteers and digital “do-
gooders.” While research in the social sciences has long 
acknowledged the influences of faith in facilitating 
prosocial behaviors, only recently have we observed an 
increased interest in HCI research on the use of 
technology in FRS practices and environments in general 
Figure 1. Wish Happiness , a large-scale Buddhist-inspired interactive installation, created for a public festival in Sydney.
@INTERACTIONSMAG
64   INTERACTIONS   JULY–AUGUST 2022TENSION BETWEEN SCIENCE AND FRS:  
IMPACT ON HCI AND DESIGN
Khushnood Naqshbandi:  In my survey study on digital 
volunteers on a scientific research platform (Figure 2), many 
volunteers directly mentioned how their faith inspires them to “give 
back” or “make a difference.” Some also mentioned how religious 
institutions facilitate other forms of volunteering. Their religious 
zeal inspires their volunteering and is positioned parallel to their 
contribution to science, thus challenging the science-faith dichotomy 
often presented to us.
The tensions between various forms of FRS and the 
scientific temperament in the modern West arise from a 
complex history, which in many ways has influenced the topics 
that are deemed relevant for research in collective 
consciousness. Subsequently, and due to additional colonial 
history surrounding the politics and geographies of 
manufacturing, innovation ownership, and power, many 
design trends still represent Judeo-Christian values, albeit with 
secularized undertones. Despite the current secular 
perception that aims to separate science and religion, evidence 
suggests the prevalence of FRS as a motivator and source of 
inspiration and resilience for many people. It can be argued 
that we would do a disservice to HCI research specifically, as 
well as to scientific research in general, to perpetuate a 
science-religion dichotomy that excludes many groups who are 
often marginalized in multiple ways, particularly those whose 
faith, religion, or spiritual values are not shared by the 
researchers.
Take Australia, where the number of people who identify as 
religious has decreased over the past few decades. This does 
not provide a complete picture of the spiritual or faith-based 
inclination of Australian society. For instance, it hardly 
represents people who engage in spiritual practices but do not 
associate with organized religion, or are simply irreligious or 
less religious. We ask: How can design researchers explore the 
possibilities that come with the evolution and varied 
expression of FRS? How do we reconcile our responsibilities toward those who may or 
may not be afforded an 
opportunity simply due to 
our seemingly secular design 
decisions? And how can we 
resolve tensions presented to 
us in design practice, 
particularly when we 
ourselves do not share the 
FRS-based values of the 
people we design for or 
research with? Designing 
around and through these 
tensions requires solidarity 
with people for whom faith, 
religion, or spiritual 
practices may guide 
everyday life and 
relationships. To achieve 
that, we must understand 
the notion of representation 
in design. This requires 
nonjudgmental intent and a 
commitment to advocacy.
FRS AND 
REPRESENTATION
Kristina Mah: In my review of influence and inspiration from 
Buddhism in HCI for well-being, I found that while there is much 
research that is inspired by traditional Buddhist practices, it is my 
impression that researchers emphasize the use of Western secular 
definitions of terms such as mindfulness  while implicitly referring 
to the original Eastern sources, or omitting this knowledge lineage 
altogether.
A more personal example of FRS and representation is the 
experience I have had of answering questions at international 
conferences. This includes questions about my research not It is 
challenging to 
be inclusive of 
FRS practices 
in design for 
technology-
mediated 
prosocial 
behaviors 
when the 
HCI space is 
predominantly 
secularized, 
and hardly any 
discourse on 
faith exists.
Figure 2. Screenshot of StepUp for Dementia Research, a science-based research website where people volunteer for participation  
in scientific research.
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
JULY–AUGUST 2022   INTERACTIONS   65within dominant expressions of identity along the lines of, for 
example, geography, ethnicity, belief, or social group. 
Designing for FRS and embedding relevant representation in 
design must address intersectionality. This can be considered 
an extension of design justice, which we believe is a necessary 
addition to the new movements to improve the design of legal 
and social policies.
Unless we create spaces and opportunities for discussions 
on varied forms, expressions, and representations of FRS, we 
are bound to perpetrate the status quo that limits access to and 
the utility of sociotechnical systems to select groups of users 
and their beneficiaries. We argue that overlooking the need for 
such spaces in prosocial HCI due to the lack of precedents 
inclusive of FRS would cause harm to these demographics or 
mis/underrepresent them.
FRS AS PERSUASION  
FOR COMMUNITY WELFARE
Khushnood Naqshbandi:  A research participant commented, 
“We held a cake store organized through my church to help raise 
money for leukemia. I love helping my community with 
fundraising. It gets me more involved with the people and give 
others smiles.” In my research, some participants mentioned how 
FRS-based institutions or FRS-oriented community endeavors 
form a structured pathway for engaging in prosocial community 
action, specifically in traditional, in-person volunteering.
FRS-based practices and motives for community-based 
activities form an important part of human societies, and can 
be considered as one of the markers of human civilizations. All 
major religions support compassion and helping the needy and 
vulnerable, which are widely considered to be prosocial 
behaviors. Even though FRS-inspired prosociality may not 
always be directly tied to altruistic motivation, it often instills 
an obligation to serve and forms a community-driven pathway 
for various prosocial behaviors such as charity and 
volunteering.
One example is zakat , or compulsory giving, in Islamic 
tradition that drives a lot of welfare practices in Muslim-
majority regions, and has even been recognized as a way of 
fulfilling the United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals. 
The UN’s digital fundraising for humanitarian causes has 
recognized religious giving by assigning a separate portal 
(https:/ /zakat.unhcr.org/en) to this based on its enormous 
potential for humanitarian welfare. Another example of 
organized community welfare inspired by FRS is that of Sikh 
community volunteering. In the event of crises or disasters 
such as the Australian bushfires and the Covid-19 pandemic, 
the Sikh community has repeatedly provided much-needed 
community relief because of its well-organized, faith-based 
prosocial activities, for which members have been consistently 
praised as community champions. However, despite the 
profound influence on community welfare, the representation 
of such FRS-inspired prosociality and ways of designing with 
FRS in mind in HCI is hardly adequate.
CRITIQUE
As a counterargument, it is pertinent to mention that FRS 
is tied to complex and often political tensions, whether 
related to communal issues, international politics, 
persecution of religious minorities, or religious arguments 
being appropriated by populist narratives as part of their 
appeal to the dominant culture and citizenry. However, if presenting secular values 
that are endemic to scientific 
research, as well as questions 
around the delicate nature of 
inspiration versus 
“appropriation” of cultural 
artifacts, concerning the 
permissibility of articulating 
interpretations or 
understandings of cultural 
forms.
There are many facets of 
representation. Behavioral 
(and, dare we say, 
traditional design) research 
is dominated by initiatives 
that are primarily 
conducted and published in 
English and follow 
secularized research 
processes. As a result, the 
religious, faith, or spiritual 
values of many less-known 
or less-represented groups 
of people that emerge in 
such research may not be accurately captured or expressed.
Buddhist-inspired inquiry is a good example of 
representation of FRS in prosocial design. Buddhist inquiry 
into the natural world proceeds from first-person embodied 
inquiry, a radically different point of departure compared with 
Western science, and its methods differ correspondingly [8]. In 
recent years, organizations such as the Mind & Life Institute 
(https:/ /www.mindandlife.org) have offered a platform for 
dialogue between Eastern and Western scholars. Pioneers in 
this space such as Francisco Varela have argued for the 
necessity of empirical science to acknowledge the inherent 
subjectivity that forms an essential part of understanding. In 
his book Buddhism & Science: Breaking New Ground , B. Allan 
Wallace states that “the scientific engagement with Buddhism 
can shed a fresh light on our own subjectivity, our own 
language, and our own categories, for example, of religion, 
science, and philosophy. By recognising the unique contexts of 
both Buddhism and science, all participants in such dialogue 
may at least begin to escape from the tendency to unwittingly 
attribute a privileged status to our own preconceptions” [8].
Moreover, religious institutions and faith-based 
communities are significant sources of social inclusion and 
prosocial actions for many people, in both the Global South 
and Global North. For instance, many displaced refugee 
communities find solace in inclusive spaces in FRS-based 
community participation. Only recently have academic 
disciplines started to recognize the importance of the spiritual 
values of underserved Indigenous communities and how their 
various ways of knowing and action are intricately tied to their 
spirituality. These contribute to the decolonization of 
academia through extending our understanding of 
representation (who gets to be included) and epistemological 
investigation.
This notion of representation is inherently intersectional, as 
faith-based, racial, and other aspects of identity are 
intertwined. Intersectionality, not surprisingly, is linked to a 
legacy of oppression when a marginalized group does not fit FRS-based 
practices and 
motives for 
community-
based 
activities form  
an important 
part of human 
societies,  
and can be 
considered 
as one of 
the markers 
of human 
civilizations. 
@INTERACTIONSMAG
66   INTERACTIONS   JULY–AUGUST 2022we are aiming for design justice, critical engagement with 
these and other sociopolitical factors involving FRS is not 
only encouraged but needed. One such way critical 
engagement with FRS in design could be achieved is 
through the refinement of design tools and methods that 
highlight individual and collective sensibilities through 
people participation. Additionally, design can borrow the 
accumulated knowledge from social sciences that are 
continuously engaging with such complex sociopolitical 
issues. Thus, we invite designers and researchers to 
explore (rather than ignore) the opportunity to foster the 
FRS motivations, values, and practices of billions of 
people worldwide, despite the political complexities 
involved.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Khushnood Naqshbandi: A fair and just design of 
sociotechnical volunteering systems would include all those 
factors that individually or through a combination facilitate 
volunteer engagement and well-being. In my research, I include 
FRS as a possible determinant of volunteer motivation that is 
closely linked to their values involving service and giving back. 
This is one of the psychosocial factors included in a proposed 
volunteer-centric design to enhance online volunteering 
platforms [6,7].
Kristina Mah: My development of a Buddhist-inspired 
interactive installation highlighted an interface between ritual 
interaction and compassion-driven design. Ritual interaction 
itself can embody collective motivation at the scale of an 
individual or a group, and this can generate an ambience of 
cohesion that can be powerful and contagious [5]. Much 
investigation is warranted in the area of ritual interaction 
design strategies for prosocial HCI. Furthermore, exploring 
the fine-grained qualities of experience in the ritual process of 
cultivating prosocial qualities through the refinement of first- 
and second-person approaches (e.g., [9]) holds much potential 
for developing an understanding of how prosociality is 
constructed and lived.
With the advent of many forms of prosociality in the 
online sphere, it is relevant to ask where FRS fits into 
prosocial design. There is still more work that could be 
done. Indeed, the broader discipline of HCI could also 
benefit from the inclusion of FRS. As such, we propose 
three provocations:
• What can we do to make HCI and design research (e.g., 
through surveys and participatory workshops) inclusive of 
FRS-based values, motives, and rituals?
• How can we, as HCI researchers, develop 
nonjudgmental practices that fairly capture FRS-based 
values, without marginalizing any group and in spite of our 
own beliefs and practices?
• How can ways of knowing and rituals, as found in FRS 
systems that influence human motives and conduct, be 
acknowledged and embedded into design?
In this article, we outlined designing in solidarity with 
FRS-based groups and advocated for normalizing the 
varied expressions of their attributed values and rituals. 
The hesitancy in our community is understandable. There 
are examples of systems in relation to religious 
expressions that have been misused and taken advantage of by political ideologies. It is easier to follow the norm 
and not discuss politics and religion in order to avoid 
controversy. However, the easy way out would almost 
certainly marginalize people who may benefit from our 
willingness to explore the relevance of FRS in their life, in 
an open and respectful way. These days, we hardly find 
any technical system unaffected by constructs that are 
socially understood, such as identity, gender, and 
meaning. In a world where HCI and design practice is so 
influential on our prosocial and other behaviors, how do 
we develop sociotechnical systems that foster healthy 
expression of faith, religion, and spirituality?
Endnotes
1. Albanese, C.L. America: Religions and Religion. Cengage Learning, 
2012.
2. Hick, J. Faith as knowledge. In Faith and Knowledge . Springer, 
1988, 200–211.
3. Zinnbauer, B.J. et al. Religion and spirituality: Unfuzzying the 
fuzzy. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 36 , 4 (1997), 
549–564.
4. Buie, E. Let us say what we mean: Towards operational definitions 
for techno-spirituality research. Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New 
York, 2019, 1–10.
5. Mah, K., Loke, L., and Hespanhol, L. Designing with ritual 
interaction: A novel approach to compassion cultivation through 
a Buddhist-inspired interactive artwork. Proc. of the 14th 
International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied 
Interaction.  ACM, New York, 2020, 363–375.
6. Naqshbandi, K.Z., Liu, C., Taylor, S., Lim, R., Ahmadpour, N., 
and Calvo, R. “I am most grateful.” Using gratitude to improve 
the sense of relatedness and motivation for online volunteerism. 
International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 36 , 14 
(2020), 1325–1341.
7. Naqshbandi, K.Z., Taylor, S., Pillai, A.G., and Ahmadpour, N. 
Labour of love: Volunteer perceptions on building relatedness in 
online volunteering communities. Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, 
2021, 1–6.
8. Wallace, B.A. Introduction: Buddhism and science—Breaking 
down the barriers. In Buddhism & Science: Breaking New Ground . 
Columbia Univ. Press, 2003, 1–30.
9. Mah, K., Loke, L., and Hespanhol, L. Toward a contemplative 
research framework for training self-observation in HCI: A study 
of compassion cultivation. ACM Trans. on Computer-Human 
Interaction 28 , 6 (2021), 1–27.
 Khushnood Naqshbandi is a human-computer interaction 
researcher specializing in human-centered design and computing. 
Her research examines the design of technology for digitally enabled 
prosocial behavior with a focus on digital volunteerism, and the various 
technological, social, and psychological considerations that factor into 
the engagement and well-being of digital volunteers.
 →khushnood.naqshbandi@sydney.edu.au
 Kristina Mah is an artist and design researcher at the Design Lab 
at the University of Sydney. Situated at the intersection of philosophy, 
science, art, and design, her work is motivated by concepts grounded in 
contemplative wisdom traditions, especially Buddhism, and translated 
through digital multimedia, installation art, and interaction design.
 →kristina.mah@sydney.edu.au
 Naseem Ahmadpour is a senior lecturer in human-computer 
interaction and director of the Affective Interactions Lab at the 
University of Sydney. She studies democratic ways to design interactive 
technologies that provide meaningful human experiences.
 →naseem.ahmadpour@sydney.edu.au
DOI: 10.1145/3544301 © 2022 ACM 1072-5520/22/07 $15.00
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
JULY–AUGUST 2022   INTERACTIONS   67