PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . Saudi Arabian Parents ' Perception of Online Marital 
Matchmaking Technologies  
ADEL A L-DAWOOD , Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, College of Computer and Information Sciences, Al Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud 
Islamic University, Riyadh, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia  
SERENE ALHA JHUSSEIN , Independent Researcher, Jeddah, Makkah, Saudi Arabia  
SVETLANA YAROSH,  Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA 
Finding a date or a spouse online is usually considered an individualistic endeavor  in Western cultures . This 
presents a challenge for collectivist non-Western  cultu res such as Saudi Arabia  where choosing a spouse is 
viewed as a union of two families with parents of both spouses being heavily involved . Our work aims to 
investigate how Saudi Arabian parents view the utilization of technology by their young adults to se ek 
potential spouses online.  We report our findings of interviews conducted with 16 Saudi Arabian parents (8 
fathers, 6 mothers and 1 couple). We generate qualitative themes that provide insights about how parents 
wanted to preserve their values, integrate  technology into the traditional process and protect their young 
adults from potential harms. These themes lead to  implications for designing suitable marital matchmaking 
technologies in Saudi Arabia and opportunities for future work.1 
CCS Concepts: • Human -centered computing  → Empirical studies in collaborative and social computing  • 
Social and professional topics  →    Religious orientation; Cultural characterist ics 
KEYWORDS  
Matchmaking Technologies, Social Computing, Saudi Arabia, Romantic Relationships, V alue Sensitive 
Design, Arab and Muslim Culture, Marriage, Privacy  
ACM Reference format:  
Adel Al -Dawood, Serene Alhaussein, and Svetlana Yarosh.  2020. Saudi Arab ian Parents Perception of Online 
Matchmaking technologies . In Proceedings of the ACM on Human -Computer Interaction,  Vol. 4, CSCW3,  Article 211 
(December 2020 ), 32 pages, https://doi.org/10.1145/3432910   
1 INTRODUCTION  
Technology has been utilized to find dates or relationships for almost two decades [29], but not 
much work has explored the use of technology with other stakeholders being involved (i.e. 
family). While it is common that people seek dates and relationships individually, recent work has 
explored how it is different for “Eastern ” populations wh ere involving the family in the process 
makes it safer [65]. In addition, another study has explored the role of community in online dating 
platforms [49]. These studies have suggested that a collective experience on da ting or matrimonial 
platforms might be more effective than  an individualized experience.  We encourage the Human -
                                                                 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee 
provi ded that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for third -party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the 
Own er/Author.  
Copyright 2020 held by Owner/Author  
2573-0142/2020/December - ART211.   
https://doi.org/10.1145/3432910  211211:2 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . Computer Interaction (HCI) community to investigate how this could make the design of 
matchmaking technologies more inclusive as our world popul ation is becom ing more diverse . 
As Saudi Arabia marriages usually follow a traditional process where both families are involved 
in the process, it is important to understand how this would translate to a matrimonial 
matchmaking system. A previous study [4] has shown that Saudi Arabians are interested in 
utilizing technology for marriage, but are unsur e how to navigate it while preserving their cultural 
and religious values and involving their parents in the process. Other studies have explored how 
Saudi Arabians utilize d matrimonial websites to seek a potential spouse [18] and how it might 
conflict with  the traditional process [19]. For example , women  in Saudi Arabia require their legal 
guardian's approval  when deciding who they want to marr y, which can vary base d on many 
familial and social factors [55]. In addition, family members who are against the marriage can 
create obstacles for potent ial spouses [19]. Lastly, Saudi Arabian s are obligated to please their 
parents and respect them based on Islamic teachings [2,4,37] . To the best of our knowledge, no 
previous work has explored Saudi Arabian parents' perspective on mari tal matchmaking 
technologies. For those reasons, o ur work aims to answer the following research questions : 
RQ1.  What concerns  and views  do Saudi Arabian parents have about marital matchmaking 
technologies ? 
RQ2.  What is an effective role for Saudi Arabian parents to play in  marital  matchmaking 
 technologies ? 
We investigate d these questions through the analysis of 1 6 semi-structured interviews that we 
conducted with Saudi Arabian parents with the aim to contribute to the ongoing discussion in HCI 
on inclusiv e design and cross -cultural computing.  In doing so, we aim to inform the design 
process for both creating  new and appropriating  existing technologies to support matchmaking in 
Saudi Arabia.  
2 BACKGROUND  
2.1 Traditional Marriage Process  
To understand the c ontext of our work, it is important to explain the traditional marriage process 
in Saudi  Arabia . Refer to previous works [4–6,12,16]  for more thorough explanation s. The process 
can be summarized in the following 4 steps:  
1. Proposal:  The mother of the prospective groom approaches the mother of prospective 
bride to confirm that the families are suitable for each other and reach an initial agreement. 
Sisters and aunts are possible substitutes for mothers if needed.  
2. Social engagement:  This is s imilar to “dating ” in the western context, but with the family 
aware of the couple’s interactions  and having relative control over them . For example, t hey 
can talk over the phone but in person meetings are chaperoned.  
3. Contract : After the couple and families decide they are suitable for each other; a contract 
is usually drafted by a public notary , which makes the couple legally married .  
4. Wedding:  After the contract is drafted, the couple and their families start to arrange for 
the wedding party. It is a social announcement of the marriage and when the couple starts 
to live together . 
These steps can vary depending on what  parents find accept able. For exampl e, some parent 
believe  direct interaction s between potential spouses  is limited or non -existent before the contract 
is drafted or the wedding night is over . On the other hand, other parents might allow directSaudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:3 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . interaction s to start during or before the proposal. Breaking the contract before the wedding is 
considered  as a divorce , so a relationship is considered to be “serious ” once a contract is in place.  
A divorce enacted by breaking a contract affects future marriage prospects, however it may still  be 
viewed as more favorable than a divorce after the wedding. Divorces after a wedding may be even 
more problematic for the woman due to a premium on women’s virginity in conservative cultures.  
Divorces are generally stigmatized in Saudi Arabia and avoide d, similar to other countries 
[25,42,50] .   
This work focuses on the potential role of technology during  the first two steps, the proposal 
and social engagement. Parental involvement  and the exchange of information are the main 
factors in these steps that are related to our research questions.  
2.2 Stakeholders  
The marriage process  involves a number of stakeholders2: 
1. Parents:  They have the most influence over the process. Issues may arise if parents of the 
bride and groom have conflicting opinions. Parents might insist that they choose who their 
adult children marry or allow their adult children to marry whoever they wish.  In some 
cases,  the parents  of the bride and groom m ay negotiate conditions about the marriage  
without consulting the bride and groom , such as the dowry and wedding arrangements . 
2. Groom : He usually  choose s who to marry based on his parent’s recommend ations . He 
could also suggest certain women  for his parents  to consider.  Even though he may sever 
ties with his parents if he goes against their desires, he does  not need their approval to 
marry legally.  
3. Bride:   She usually waits for the groom’s family to propose  to her family and has the 
option to accept or reje ct the proposal. However, w omen in Saudi Arabia need the approval 
of their guardian (i.e. a direct male relative, e.g. a father) to marry legally  [55]. This means 
that a guardians disapproval of a groom may hinder the marriage process . At the same 
time, the bride may view the approval of her guardian as protection , i.e. part of the vetting 
process.  
4. Public notaries:  It is common for Saudi Arabians to draft the contract with a public 
notary rather than in a courtroom. They usually serve as a mediator between the families 
and the courts and judges.  
5. Courts and Judges : They usually handle the documentation and legal proc esses of the 
marriage. They may intervene when violations occur but are otherwise not involved.  For 
example, a court may transfer the approval of the father to a judge if a case is made that the 
father is preventing his daughter(s) from marriage, also know n as adhl. 
2.3 Contemporary Gender Norms, Roles and Expectations in Saudi Arabia  
In the last 2 years, Saudi Arabia has made major law reforms affecting gender equality . Saudi 
women were granted the right to drive on June 24th, 2018  [80]. In 2019, guardianship laws were 
changed to allow women to travel, marry, divorce, be a guardian for minor children, and represent 
themselves in court without the cooperation of a male guardian  [81]. Gender segregation laws 
were also overturned in late 2019, allowing women and men to interact in public settings  [79].  
                                                                 
2 Saudi Arabia follows Sharia law and marriage can only be between a man and a woman.211:4 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . Even though Saudi Arabian women have gained more rights, they need to ad here to cultural 
and religious values that have been ingrained within Saudi Arabia. For example, registering a 
marriage or a divorce requires proving that a male guardian is abusing their authority in the case 
of 'adhl  or paying the dowry back in the case of khul'3. In addition , following through with 'adhl  or 
khul comes at the cost of possible family ties being severed as a result . In other cases , extended 
family members could  intervene to annul a marriage based on tribal incompatibility.  This decision 
is usually made to avoid violence that may occur against the potential spouses or between their 
families if the marriage is not annulled.  
These changes in Saudi Arabian laws have affect ed the legal aspects of marriage and meeting 
their future  spouse , however  many cultural norms regarding matrimony remain unchanged . 
Cultural and religious values such as bir alwalidayn  [2] play a vital role in the marriage process as 
most Saudi Arabians  have pe rsonal, cultural, and religious reasons to  maintain a healthy 
relationship with their parents when choosing who they marry.  It is possible  that young adults 
may avoid challeng ing the status quo publicly  while privately being against it.  
3 RELATED WORK  
3.1 Cross -Cultural Online Matchmaking technologies  and Privacy  
Online dating has been around for almost  3 decades  [61] and U.S. marriages that started online 
between 2005 and 2012 were associated with better marital satisfaction  and were less likely to end 
up with divorce or separation compared to alternatives [24,34] . This topic is complicated to study 
but also needs to be explored more by the HCI community overall [22,23,29,75,78] , but most 
previous work was done with western populations in mind (North America and Europe). We 
highlight previous work on online dating in general and relate it to work done on understudied 
populations.  
Authe nticity and trust are a constant concern when using technology and especially in the case 
of online matchmaking technologies. Lee and Bruckman found that users managed their identity 
differently between social media and online dating, but their social medi a identity was more 
authentic and “natural ” [44]. The ability to view a friend list on social media was a method to 
measure the credibility of a user. Trust and credibility are a major concern with online dating 
especially when deception and self -exaggeration is more likely to occur in online dating platforms 
[32,67]  and current mechanisms have  not been successful with establishing trust [57]. Even 
though deception is expected in online dating, Hancock et. al. found that that its magnitude is 
usually small [35]. Nonetheless, this creates a struggle when evaluating pote ntial romantic 
partners on an online dating platform as found by Zytko et. al [76].. They also found in another 
study  that online dating coaches focused on moving the interaction offline as soon as possible . 
They believed that online evaluation of profiles was not effective at measuring a user’s personality 
and meeting in person would be more effective [74,77] . On the contrary, Saudi Arabians found 
online settings to pro vide more information since their interaction with the opposite gender 
offline is limited [14,17] . Even though recent changes have made it easier to interact with the 
opposite gender in public settings, exchanging information for marriage publicly is usually not 
acceptable. It is preferred if it is done discret ely, and online platforms are well suited for that . 
Nonetheless, online matchmaking  platforms lack a community that would provide feedback and 
                                                                 
3 Khul’ is where a wife demands to be separated from her husband in Islamic Jurisprudence.Saudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:5 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . advice for users , which would lead them to seek third party community forums  (i.e. Reddit)  as 
found by Masden  and Edwards [49]. 
In line with that, Nayak et. al. found that social matching based on previous relationships in 
online dating platforms increased the success rate of recommendations [56], but this depends on 
how success is measured in online dating platforms [48].  The definition of success is important 
for our population since it usually translates to marriage and not going on a first date or being 
engaged [16,48] . Another indicator of success in online dating was more self -disclosure as found 
by Handel and Shklovski [36], which was found to be associated with anonymity by Ma et. al. 
[46]. At the same time, there is the concern that anonymity would question the authenticity of 
self-disclosed information [45]. On the other hand, self -disclosing sensitive information such as a 
disability [60] or being HIV positive [36] might seem unfavorable for the user, but is also 
considered as a filtering mechanism to avoid negative outcomes. In addition, Ma et. al. found that 
online daters considered  overlapping location data to be useful, even though it presented security 
and p rivacy concerns [47]. We can see that information sharing is useful, but only when it is 
trustworthy and does  not violate users’ pr ivacy.  
Preserving privacy is connected to preserving reputation and honor  in Muslim and Arab 
cultures  [7,27]. Privacy invasion online can be a serious threat to relationships in Arab societies, 
which is more prevalent for those with a mid to low socioeconomic background that might hold 
onto traditions more compared to those from a high socioeconomic backgr ound [62]. In Arab 
culture there is a perception that not sharing informatio n with family and friends is a sign of 
mistrust, but this is also where they become vulnerable to privacy invasion threats. Abokhodair et 
al. defined privacy in Islam in terms of three aspects: haq al -khososyah , hurma , and  awrah  with 
each encompassing each  other in the same order [3]. The first , haq al -khososyah , includes the right 
for an individual to protect their private life to preserve their reputation.  The second , hurma , is 
meant specifically to protect the body from those who are not allowed to see it. The third, awrah , 
is more specific to intimate body parts. Saudi  Arabian s view their privacy as a right that is 
respected collectively in Muslim and Ara b cultures , but may find it harder to achieve the same 
level of collective recognition of this value in the Western world [1,3]. Since most current social 
media systems are developed with Western values in mind, this creates a fundamental tension in 
the use of social media and makes controlling their privacy troublesome.  
While Saudi  Arabian s are avid user s of social media (e.g., 75% penetration rate on Twitter [82]), 
they may hesitate to reveal any personal information online . Previous research reveals that Saudi  
Arabian  users are likely to use unidentifiable nicknames online and have multiple accounts to 
maintain more control over indi vidual privacy [2,33] . These concerns also have gendered 
components. S ocial media is frequently  viewed as a dangerou s space for women  [8] due to 
concerns over potential  for black mail if personal photos or information is gained using social 
media [3,10] . This usually means that women are less likely to use their personal photos on social 
media [9,21] . While using nicknames and having no personal photos may seem to undermine their 
agency in a western context, it  allows them to use social media more freely in the Muslim and 
Arab context with no fear of repercussions. U se of social media and online dating increases  more 
for women compared to men when they move to a western country  where this stigma may be less 
salient [8,66] . Given these concerns and stigmas, Saudi women are only likely to use matrimonial 
websites after exhausting all possible  traditional methods [4,15,18] . A previous st udy by Bajnaid 
et. al. found that Saudi Arabian men have a higher success rate of moving from online marital 
matchmaking technologies to offline interactions compared to Saudi  Arabian women [18]. 
Personal agency is a concern for both genders when using technology for marriage in Saudi211:6 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . Arabia  [18]. Nonetheless, Technology seems to provide more agency  for women since they have 
less control over the traditional marriage process compared to men (Section 2.2) . 
The potential stigma of technologically -mediated matchmaking is evident in the fact that m ost 
Saudi  Arabian s report not knowing any acquaintances who have  used matrimonial websites 
[15,18] . As this stigma is more prominent for women due to traditional courtship roles [4,15] , men 
are m ore likely to be open about using matrimonial websites compared to women and were also 
more active on them [15,6 6]. Both Saudi men and women users of such sites agreed that they used 
them to find more choices compared to traditional means [4,15,19] , but wanted to conform to 
cultural and religious norms while making use of such sites [10,11,33] . Even though marital 
matchmaking technologies are viewed as challenging social and religious norms, Saudi Arabian 
users find that their religious and cultural values shape how they view themselves online [14,17] . 
 A study conducted by Al-Dawood et al. found that most Saudi Arabians showed interest in 
utilizing matchmaking technologies but  were concerned about their parents accepting the use of 
matchmaking technologies and how to find a suitable way to collaborate with parent s in finding 
and vetting potential partners  that does  not undermine young adults ’ agency [4]. One aspect of 
parental vetting of potential partners for marriage in Saudi Arabia is lin eage [16]. For Saudi 
Arabians, this usually means differentiating between those who belong to a tribe and those who 
do not with some tribes preferring to marry within. A study done by Ortega and Hergovich [58] 
shows that interracial marriages increase d in the US with the increase of online dating usage.  In 
other words, marital matchmaking technologies could challenge the status quo of only marrying 
based on lin eage compatibility that Saudi Arabian parents support  [16]. This is a source of tension 
between parents and young adults since parents prefer  monocultural marriages  and young adults 
are willing to explore intercultural marriages while being aware that they might struggle [4]. As 
Saudi Arabian culture is becoming more technology -oriented, it might be possible that 
intercultu ral marriages would increase.  
While previous investigations covered privacy and trust concerns while using online 
matchmaking technologies, the role of Muslim and Arab parents when marriage is conducted 
online is underexplored. What information do they con sider appropriate  or important  to exchange 
when evaluat ing a potential partner? What kinds of cross gender interactions would they find 
acceptable ? How does privacy and trust play a role in the information exchange and interaction 
between potential partner s? In this work, we contribute a qua litative investigation seeking to 
address these questions.  
3.2 Parent -Child Technological I nteractions  
Previous work has highlighted interaction s between parents and their children  when using 
technology  [59,64,70,73] . While we understand young adults have different interaction s with their 
parents  compared to children , the difference is blurred between Muslim and Arab young adults 
and their parents  given the religious and cultural expectations . We highlight previous work on 
parent -child technological relationships and explain the uniqueness of the Muslim and Arab 
context  for these relationships . 
Previous work has explored how parents and adolescents manage their use of technology. 
Technology is meant to enable teenagers to learn about making safe decisions on their own as 
restricting or monitoring their usage  by their parents is not effective [13,30,71] . In other words, 
technology should be designed for them to be able to explore its usage properly and learn from 
their experiences with parents providing them with guidance . In one study, adolescents  were 
better at making moral judgements with authoritative parents which had high expectationsSaudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:7 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . regarding appropriate use of technology but did  not restrict usage [71]. In other studies, it was 
found that parental control actually increased online risks while  granting  teens more autonomy 
helped them learn from their negative experiences  [30,31]  and that developing resilience toward 
online risks is more effective than using restrictive measures to limit exposure to online risks [72]. 
In a study where parents mon itored their children’s activities, children were less likely to 
voluntarily disclose information, which had a negative effect on trust between children and their 
parents [41]. Teens prefer that their parents are not involved in their online usage to preserve 
their privacy. At the same time, teenagers are willing to give access to their information when it is 
an emergency . Teens are also more likely willing to share their information with parents if they 
were notified about it . In other cases, techn ology might provide a medium for brokering between 
parents and their youth that would improve communication  channels between them  [68]. In two 
studies done by Muñoz et al, they worked on exploring how technology can play a role in 
improving parent -adult children relationships by incorporating dialogue that would allow them to 
renegotiate their positions after children have left home and manage  expectations for both ends 
[52,53] . For Arabs and Muslims, this may be slightly different as the renegotiation of positions and 
expectations  is guided by religion and culture . 
Previous work has highlighted the importance of family values in Islamic and Arab cultures. 
The concept of bir alwalidayn  is ingrai ned in Islam and Arab culture and it requires obeying and 
respecting parents  or other family elders into adulthood  [2,4,37]. Most decisions are traditionally 
influenced by the parents or other family elders rather than by young adults  [28,69]. Even when 
young adults make the decision on their own, they usually consult the parents about it [43]. This 
may introduce tensions with personal agency for young adults who want to make their own 
decisions but also respect the opinio n of their parents , which may seem to be contradictory  [4]. 
This tension is usually intensified when using technology that was designed with the 
individualistic and independent values of the West in mind . Muslim young adults may view 
respecting their parents' opinions as part of their personal agency as they choose to partake in it. 
In other cases, they may feel socially pressured to do so. Finding a b alance between personal 
agency and respecting parents in Muslim and Arab cultures  is a constant struggle  online .  
Some people may resolve this tension by keeping parts of their life separated. Some Muslims 
and Arabs present different aspects of self offlin e versus online  to avoid conflict with their parents  
[3]. For example, they may  hide information or photos that may reveal them at mixed -gender 
gathering s [7] in order to follow the social expectations  set by their fa milies [3,10] . When people 
employ this strategy, technology may increase the danger of context collapse, such as being 
tagged in content  that would violate cultural or religious norms [3]. This may cause people to be 
extra vigilant that their posts or online traces cannot be used to harm their own or their family’s 
reputation and honor [2,8,33] . For example , some  users protect their family’s reputation and honor 
by hiding their identities in their online activities  [2,7,33] . One of the key implications of this 
strategy is that people may hesitate to use online tools for purposes that traditionally involve 
family involvement, particularly matchmaking.  While these practices  protect users ’ privacy  and 
gives them more personal agency  online , it alienates their family in the process.  
However, while previous work has articulated the importance of family involvement, the 
specifics of this involvement and how it relates  to other soci otechnical consideration s of a 
potential matchmaking sit e remain unclear. Our work contributes an empirical investigation on 
how parents perceive online matchmaking technologies and what role they would p lay in them 
and investigating what types of interact ions and information would be suitable or important in the 
online marital matchmaking process.211:8 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . 4 METHODS  
4.1  Participants  
Participants  were initially recruited through an online sign up form that was distributed through 
multiple social media platforms. The main platform was Twitter, which was utilized by soliciting 
retweets from Saudi Arabian public figures to reach more participants. Another recruitment 
method was the first author personally reach ing out to acquaintances that might be interested or 
know  someone who was interested. We attempted to recruit participants from diverse 
backgrounds but were not successful. The regions our participants belonged to were limited to 
Riyadh (8), Makkah (4), Najran (2), Albaha (1) and Tabuk (1). It is worth noting th at we Saudi 
Arabia has 13 regions , which means less than half the regions are represented in our sample.  Most 
of our participants were highly educated with 10 of them having a masters or a PhD. We have an 
even distribution for income with middle class bein g the majority and lower middle class  and 
upper middle class as outliers . Participants were as young as 38 years old and as old as 6 3 years 
old. For the background  column, Qabali is having tribal linage while  Arab i is not having tribal 
linage , which we will refer to in other parts of the paper for simplicity. In addition , a Hadhri  lived 
a modern lifestyle (e.g. City) while a Badawi lived a simpler lifestyle (e.g. Rural).  Table 1 below 
provides more info about ou r participants . 
Table 1. Study participants Character istics  
# Region  Gender  Background  Education  Income  Age 
P1 Riyadh  Male  Qabali Hadhri  Bachelors  Mid 53 
P2 Riyadh  Female  Qabali Hadhri  PhD Mid 46 
P3 Riyadh  Male  Arab i Hadhri  Masters  Mid 43 
P4 Makkah  Female  Qabali Hadhri  Bachelors  Mid 38 
P5 Riyadh  Male  Arab i Hadhri  Highschool  Low 63 
P6 Riyadh  Male  Qabali Hadhri  Bachelors  Mid 52 
P7 AlBaha Male  Qabali Bad awi Masters  Low 45 
P8 Tabuk  Male  Qabali Bad awi PhD High  50 
P9 Riyadh  Male  Qabali Hadhri  PhD High  57 
P10 Riyadh  Male  Qabali Hadhri  Bachelors  High  60 
P11 Makkah  Female  Arab i Hadhri  Masters  Mid 38 
P12 Makkah  Female  Arab i Hadhri  PhD Mid 39 
P13 Makkah  Female  Arab i Hadhri  Masters  Low 48 
P14 Riyadh  Female  Qabali Hadhri  Some college  Low 51 
P15a  Najran  Male  Qabali Bad awi Masters  Mid 47 
P15b Najran  Female  Qabali Bad awi Masters  Mid 40 
4.2  Inclusion C riteria  
Even though we aimed to recruit Saudi Arabian parents that were at least 45 years or older and 
have a child that is at least 15 years old, 5 parents were younger than 45 and one of them had a 
child that was 14 years old. The reason we decided to be  flexible with the inclusion criteria is to 
include more participants in our study. Also, this did  not violate our rationale for these age 
thresholds, which is that parents would relate to their current role in  finding a spouse for their 
young adult childr en rather than have them hypothesize future scenarios.  Fifteen  years is the age 
when a child would reach puberty from an Islamic perspective and are considered accountable 
adults [83]. They would not necessarily get married when they turn 15, but it would be the earliestSaudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:9 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . age that the topic of marriage would be introduced. Also, this age is not associated with what 
parents perceive d as an acceptable age for their children to use technology for marriage or any 
other purpose . Other inclusion criteria were  that they are Saudi Arabian citizens or closely related 
to one (spouse o r child) and have lived at least 10 years in Saudi Arabia.  
4.3  Procedure  
We conducted semi -structured interviews with 16 participants with 9 males and 7 females, which 
included one couple. Interviews were conducted either in person or over Skype , based on the 
participants’ preference . Interviews were conducted in Arabic and lasted between 45 and 90 
minutes  and generated 87 pages of interview data . Participants were compensated with a  gift that 
was equivalent to 50 Saudi Riyals  or more. We were advised by a Saudi Arabian professional that 
it is more suitable to give gifts such as chocolate or fancy p ens rather than cash to older 
participants. The interviews covered three aspects: parti cipants initial thoughts about 
matchmaking technologies, reflecting on hypothetical features of matchmaking technologies, 
discussing the importance of sharing certain pieces of information through matchmaking 
technologies and concluding with any general co mments or remarks they have about the study.  
Participants  were provided a consent form both when signing up for the study as a soft copy and 
before conducting the interview as a hard copy.  We stopped conducting interviews when data 
saturation was reached,  and we did not gain new information from interviews.  
4.4 Analysis  
Interviews were transcribed in Arabic by the first and second authors . After that, the first author 
conducted qualitative inductive data driven thematic analysis. This began with open cod ing the 
interview transcriptions as mentioned in  [40]. The interviews generated a total of 440 codes. After 
that, the first author used affinity diagram ing [51] to generate  thematic clusters by constantly 
comparing and organizing codes based on how similar they were  to each other . Thematic clusters 
were generated when a significant number of codes were highly similar to each other. During the 
process, cluster s grew, shrunk, split and merged until the final set of clusters was generated and all 
codes were evaluated appropriately.  
4.5 Research Position Statement  
The first author  was born in the US and raised between Saudi Arabia  and the US and has dual 
citizenship . He spent his childhood and late adulthood in the US and his teenage years in Saudi 
Arabia . He is bilingual and is accustomed to most of the traditions of everyday life in Saudi  Arabia . 
He is currently a PhD student  at a US institution exploring ways to design digital technologies for 
Saudi Arabians to find their spouses online within cultural and religious expectations . His work is 
funded by a scholarship from Saudi Arabia.  
 
5 RESULTS  
Based on the thematic clusters res ulting from our qualitative analysis, we identified three major 
themes which capture S audi Arabian  parents’ perspectives on the potential use of matchmaking 
technologies. The first theme captures parental perspective regarding  preserving their religious 
and cultural values  and integrating them  within technological systems . The second theme focuses 
on the parent al belie f that young adults are becoming more independent and autonomous when211:10 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . they use technology to seek a spouse for marriage . The third theme pr ovides a rich accounting of 
parental  concerns about how technology could be used or misused in the Saudi Arabian context.  
5.1 Preserv e Religio us and Cultur al Values  Within Technological Systems  
In this section , we report how Saudi Arabian  parents sought to  preserve their cultural and 
religious values when  technological systems  are involved in the marriage process . We begin with 
parents describing  important religious and cultural aspects in the marriage process . After that , 
parents express how technology complement s the traditional marriage process . Lastly, parents 
expect technology to preserve privacy from a cultural viewpoint . 
 
5.1.1 Managing Religio us and Cultural  Values . Parents wanted to maintain the role  that cultural 
and religious factors play in the process of choosing a suitable spouse for their young adults . For 
religion, being religious was preferred  but it was more important that both spouses agreed on 
what it meant to be religious . For culture, it was important that families are culturally compat ible 
to avoid conflicts and divorce. In addition, some  cultural beliefs and practices negatively affect the 
traditional marriage process  and technology might provide alternatives . Even though Saudi 
Arabians as a society might be skeptical about using techn ology for marriage  [4], parents are 
hopeful that technology can play a positive role in the marri age process while respecting religious 
and cultural expectations.  
Religio us Compatibi lity. Religiosity is a source of reassurance for parents when they evaluate 
potential spouses for their young adults. They consider a potential spouse who is not religious to 
be more likely to cause injustice in a relationship.  A mother, P15b, states  “you know the person 
fears god ” when describing a potential spouse who is religious . A potential spouse being religious 
is viewed as a sign of a successful marriage. It is typical in Saudi Arabian culture that potential 
spouses are asked about their religiosity as an initial filter to decide if they are a suitable candidate 
for marriage or not. A father, P9, explains that choosing a religious wife “might have a positive  
effect ” on his son . This is supported by another father , P5, that prefers to marry off his son or 
daughter to a religious person even if they are not religious themselves.  Parents viewed religion as 
a binary concept , with a religious person being “good ” and a non -religious person being “bad.” 
This is also associated with the marriage’s success or failure.  
“Even if my son is not good and the girl is good, I prefer it. Better than a bad girl like him...or my daughter is 
not good, I marry her to a good man be tter than another because he is the best choice ” P5 
On the other hand, religious compatibility between potential spouses was important to avoid 
conflicts in the future . A father, P6, emphasizes the importance of religio us compatibility  for his 
daughter ’s prospective proposals , “If an extremely liberal  family proposed for my daughter, I 
would not accept .” As a religious father, he would not want his daughter to feel obligated to 
assimilate with her potential husband’s liberal family  or vice versa . A mother , P13, argues that “If 
there is a religious conflict, it would be hard for [their marriage] to continue .” This religious 
conflict arises because of different interpretations of what being religious means. Parents view a 
person’s religiosity as an extension  of their expectations and lifestyle, which may cause conflict 
when potential spouses have different expectations . 
“What type of hijab is required and other religious principles so they would help each other because religion 
is an important factor. Also, s o they would not be surprised with something different in their lifestyle later. ” 
P14 
Overall, parents view a religious potential spouse as an indicator of a successful marriage  but 
worry that  conflicting interpretations of religiosity between spouses migh t lead to a toughSaudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:11 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . marriage or divorce . Conflicting interpretations arise when cultural and religious values become 
interleaved. For example, in the previous quote, P14 mentions “What type of hijab is required, ” 
which has both a cultural and religious compo nent. Some view niqab  as religiously optional or a 
cultural obligation while others believe it is religiously required. As a result, both cultural and 
religious compatibility are needed.  
Culture  Compatibility . Parents emphasize d that it was important that families are culturally 
compatible and were against  certain  cultural practice s and beliefs  that hindered the marriage 
process  but did not want to stand out .  
One of the most important cultural factors in Saudi Arabian marriages is tribal lineage. A 
mother who is Qabali, P4, explains  “A man that has no tribal association , it is hard to accept him .” 
The reason this matters for the parents is that they do not want their grandchildren to be outcasts 
because their father is Arabi. Par ents generally prefer that spouses are either both Qabali or both 
Arabi  to avoid  problems that could affect their extend ed family. For example, Qabali families 
might boycott marrying from a  certain  Qabali family because one of their members married an 
Arab i. In some of these cases, the extended family might pressure the spouses or their parents to 
end the marriage to restore order within the family. In addition to that, identifying a person as 
Qabali or Arabi is not easy.  Parents are reluctant to use techno logy for marriage because they are 
not sure if tribal lineage can be easily verified online  as P2 states “Names are similar, like our 
[family name] can be tribal or not and you cannot tell .” Compatible linage is crucial as it affects 
potential spouses and their extended family's  future prospects.   
“Compatible linage is very important because it affects the family. It affects my sisters, their daughters and 
female cousins. ” P2 
Another  reason parents prefer the traditional marriage  process  is that it was easier to identify a 
Badawi or Hadhri lifestyle . The conflict of lifestyles could be a concern for the potential spouses. A 
mother, P2, recounts her experience  “I married a Badawi and I am Hadhri and had a hard ti me. In 
the end I asked for khul’.”  In some cases, the potential spouse is suitable as an individual but the 
community they belong to has an undesirable gender hierarchy  that is imposed by their lifestyle . 
“When a great guy proposes to your daughter, but y ou know...their community demeans women. Why make 
my daughter deal with this? I do not want this environment ” P6 
While it may seem discriminatory to not accept marriage between Qabalis and Arabis or 
Badawis and Hadhris, parents believed that the difference s will eventually cause issues for their 
young adults and lead to separation or a bad marriage . From a religious standpoint, these cultural 
values conflict with Islamic teachings that are against discrimination. Nonetheless, they are still 
socially and cul turally  present  in Saudi Arabia.  
Technological Alternatives are stigmatized . While c ultural practices such as spouses not meet ing 
before the wedding night can lead to divorce, technological alternatives  are stigmatized in the 
Saudi Arabian community . Parents are also concerned that the traditional method has led to many 
divorces. A mother, P4, explains  “Each one blames the other and you know the reason is ‘scratch 
and win’4.” She believes divorce is a byproduct of spouses not knowing each other before the 
wedding night and compares it to buying a lottery ticket. Even though Saudi Arabian practices can 
create obstacles in the marriage process that  parents do not necessarily agree with , they do not 
want to be the ones that break norms as it may have a neg ative effect on them and their young 
adults . This means parents realize that technology can be useful but are worried that other Saudi 
                                                                 
4 ‘Scratch and win’ is a phrase used in Saudi Arabia to describe traditional marriages in a negative light.211:12 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . Arabians view it in a negative light. This in turn would threaten both the parents and their young 
adults'  reputation.  
“It is sensitive that someone knows that I allowed my daughter to use technology…It is like she is putting 
herself on display…there might be criticism from the community …I might allow it, but I will not let anyone 
know about it until it becomes common and [a cceptable] ” P12 
Parent s realize that customs and culture have been changing recently  and believe that 
technology might be able to help with the marriage process while preserving their values. W ith 
the changes in social dynamic s over time , parents consider technology as a leverage they could 
utilize . A father, P10, states “Because of social circumstances, social connections have weakened, 
and people got busy…Technology might help in finding solutions for marriage seekers .” Parents 
do not consider technology as a threat but rather that technology should be designed to improve 
the traditional marriage process while preserving and respecting their values.  This becomes 
crucial when cultural and religious values conflict because of the different ways Saudi Arabian s 
enact  their religious and cultural values.  
“Customs and culture have changed. Therefore, even in the process of [marriage], it is possible that 
[technology] serves us, such that we do  not impinge on our religion, customs and culture. ” P3 
Conclusion.  Parents were concerned about maintaining their cultural and religious values  
during the marriage process . Religious potential spouse s were favored if they had compatible  
religious views.  Having a similar linage and lifestyle was culturally preferred. Some c ultural 
practices an d beliefs created obstacles in the marriage process,  but parents did not want to break 
the norms . Maintaining both cultural and religious values while avoiding conflicts between them 
is a complex process. These findings address some of the concerns and views S audi Arabian  
parents have about marital matchmaking technologies (RQ1). Nonetheless, Parents are hopeful 
that technology can play a role in the matrimonial matchmaking process if it preserves and 
respects their values.   
 
5.1.2 Technology Enhanc es the Traditional Marriage  Process . Technology can improve t he 
traditional marriage process,  but the former should not cause the latter to become obsolete . 
Technology allows potential spouses to know each other better before marriage while the 
traditional marriage process maintain s cultural norms  and involves parents in the process . 
Access to Information.  The traditional marriage process limits potential spouses from 
exchanging information and representing themselves appropriately and tech nology could provide 
alternative solutions . Those who try to seek more information than what the traditional process 
provides are viewed negatively.  Technology would allow potential spouses , especially women,  to 
decide how they present themselves appropriately for marriage . A father, P8, explains  “Women 
might need [technology]  more… some present themselves in a bad way in weddings .” The 
traditional marriage process  utilizes weddings and social gatherings as a medium for women to 
present themselves t o mothers of potential grooms . Technology is viewed as a better alternative 
for potential spouses to present themselves  and exchange information compared to the traditional 
marriage process.  
“There is a lack of information when someone looks for a spouse. [Technology]  might help with solving 
problems. Culturally, there are limitations and there is social pressure for those who tr y to seek information. 
Sometimes they seem like they have crossed boundaries  or are attempting to  seek people’s secrets. ” P7 
Techn ology to Traditional Transition.  Parents realize that young adults may utilize technology 
without their knowledge  as it provides them with more options but insist that it must transition to 
the traditional process . Parents are against  technology when it is used to replace the traditionalSaudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:13 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . process . A father, P8, says “There is no way [a dad] comes and proposes for his son and tells [me] 
they knew about my daughter through technology. ”  Parents prefer to maintain the traditional 
process public ly even if techno logy was used privately . Parents are willing to  help their young 
adults by convinc ing other parents to transition from technolog y to the traditional process . A 
father, P7, explains “I would meet her father and try to convince him that [they]  would meet…in 
her house or a public place. ” Parents might accept that their young adults utilize technology for 
marriage without their knowledge if it transitions into the traditional process . 
“Technology would provide them with the comfort of freedom of choice. Some fa milies are more accepting of 
technology. Sometimes the youth use it without telling their families. ” P12 
Parents consider their involve ment in the transition from technology to be essential to make 
sure it aligns with cultural expectations . Parents viewed themselves as secondary screeners for 
potential spouses that are chosen by their young adults  through technology so that societal 
standards are not affected. A father, P10, elaborates “I must sit with [potential grooms]  to know 
everything…social status…int ellectual compatibility and social compatibility. ” Parents usually 
want to be involved in the transition from technology to the traditional process to ensure it is 
done properly . 
“In the beginning, it will be only the two knowing each other and understanding each other more but after 
that when it transitions into marriage, the families must intervene. They must educate each other about 
their family’s norms [and traditions] ” P12 
Technology Utilized when Traditional is not Viable.  Parents prefer th e traditional route when 
social connections are strong within the community but  realize that technology can help widen 
the pool of potential spouses.  A mother, P12, believes that technology might help spouses find 
each other within their own community  that they would not consider otherwise . She says  
“[Technology] might be beneficial in making a person notice… [It] might say that this girl and her 
cousin are compatible. ” Parents would find technology helpful when they live in a community that 
they are not fa miliar with . A father, P10, says  “[The father]  lives in a community where no one 
knows him…  if he went to technology, it would benefit him .” Parents do consider technology to be 
helpful but prefer the traditional process as it is more efficient when it is feasible . 
“A person living close to his family and community and everyone knows him… I think technology will not 
help. Traditional is better and faster. ” P10 
Conclusion.  Parents prefer the traditional marriage process  (without technology's facilitation) , 
even though they realize that technology can help improve it. Parents major concern is that 
technology would replace the traditional process, which in turn would minimize their role as 
parents in the matrimonial matchmaking process. This addresses (RQ2) what  role Saudi Arabian 
parents would play in matchmaking technologies. They emphasize that their role is to  ensure that 
matchmaking technologies are only a tool to find a suitable potential spouse and that they lead to 
a transition to the traditional marriage  process.  
 
5.1.3 Managing  privacy online to protect young adults and preserve cultural values . Parents are 
concerned that technology might expose young adults to danger ous situations  or cause them to  
violate cultural expectations. Young adults should take precautions by not disclos ing their identity 
online until they find a suitable spouse. At the same time, they  should know enough about 
potential spouses to ensure they meet cultural standards . Daughters should be more vigilant about 
sharing their information online as it is more culturally sensitive  compared to sons. In general, 
sharing excessive information can attract unintended harm to young adults . Parents want to 
protect their young adults and ensur e that cultural expectations are preserved.211:14 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . Parents believe that y oung adults have more control over the marriage process and can 
preserve their privacy online when they use  technology anonymously. Some young adult's might 
be more sensitive about keeping their identity confidential and preserving th eir privacy online 
compared to others. A mother, P2, says “Some might die if their name is known…it is respectful to 
preserve someone’s privacy. ” At the same time , technology enables y oung adults to get to know 
their potential spouse before they decide to get engaged  to them  traditionally  and without their 
parents' knowledge . A mother, P12, says “You can choose that your mom and dad do not know 
because at first it is getting to know the person, not an engagement. ” Being anonymous also 
allows young adults to  make multiple attempts to find a suitable spouse without worrying about 
their identity being revealed . A father, P10, states “A person used technology once, twice and 
thrice…when his identity is unknown, I think it would help this person to use it until h e finds the 
suitable person .” Being anonymous allows young adults to find a suitable spouse online and 
decided when to transition to the traditional marriage process while maintaining their privacy.  
“First talk about finances, age, school and tribal compat ibility…in the beginning, a person would not want 
others to know him. After the family and community are compatible, we start an individual agreement. ” P4 
While being anonymous has its benefits, knowing a potential spouse's tribal affiliation and 
geographi cal location is essential for parents and young adults to decide if they are culturally  
compatible . Tribal affiliation should be known earlier in the process as it can make or break the 
relationship. A  father, P8, explains “When they know each other, it is revealed that she was not 
tribal…if it was known earlier, there would not be a relationship. ” Geographical location could 
indicate a cultural mismatch as a father, P10, states “Some do not like to marry from different 
regions…they like from their environment, their region. ” It could also indicate a transportation 
burden for potential spouses as a father, P1, explains “The region is important to know the 
commute. Be sure she is from your region. Like taking her to her family .” At the same time, young 
adults should not know each other's precise locations as it may cause them to get involved in 
culturally unacceptable interactions. It is important to know a potential spouse's tribal affiliation 
and regional  location to measure cultural compatibility but revealing their precise location may 
lead to culturally inappropriate interactions.  
“Even if they were engaged, I prefer that they do not know their locations before marriage…they might meet 
when engaged and we find it unacceptab le before marriage. ” P11 
Parents are more concerned about preserving their daughters ' identity and modesty online 
compared to their sons. A father, P3, says “Maybe the man does not mind putting his picture and 
specific details, but a woman might be more re served. ” It is common for Saudi Arabian w omen to 
manage their privacy online based o n how their family would react to it. A father, P7, explains  
“Privacy is always an obstacle…What if [her family] saw [her] picture online? They will kill [her]. 
Social pres sure is involved. ” How a woman presents herself online reflects on how society 
perceives her and accepts her as a n acceptable  potential spouse.  
“Most people are fearful to marry a girl having a picture, uncovered …she would be liberal or has a strong 
person ality. Not suitable as a mother or to handle responsibility …if it was a pseudo name and her identity is 
hidden, society would accept it. It is unusual for a girl to be bold. Not usual for a girl to impose herself or 
show her identity frankly and transparen tly. It is hard, let us be realistic. ” P15b 
Parents are concerned about y oung adults sharing information about their location or identity 
that could threaten their safety. For example, if a young adult  reject s a potential spouse that is not 
suitable for them, the  potential spouse  might retaliate. A mother, P13, says “Maybe if someone 
knew my daughter and she rejected him he would hurt her or try to chase her. ” Young adults 
sharing their location could result in  potential spouses using it to stalk them. A father, P6, explainsSaudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:15 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . “Location could be a tool for the stalkers. I know they are going to this store, let me go there. ” As a 
result, p arents encourage  young adults to be cautious when they share their informatio n and 
make sure it is done in a safe and private manner.  
“Even if you share, you can share it safely. Like do not put coordinates, put a large circle…this the 
applications main responsibility, to preserve the privacy and safety of the users ” P7 
Conclusion.  Parents want to ensure that young adults are using technology appropriately  when 
seeking potential spouses  to remain safe, preserve their privacy and maintain cultural 
expectations. While technology provides young adults with more agency in the marriage p rocess, 
parents are worried about the risks that may arise. This section addresses some of the concerns 
that Saudi Arabian parents have about using marital matchmaking technologies (RQ1). They 
believe that marital matchmaking technologies can be utilized a ppropriately if young adults follow 
cultural and safety guidelines.  
5.2 Young Adults Autonomy Requires Maturity  
Parents believe that young adults should be able to  decide who they will marry if they maintain a 
respect ful relationship with their parents and  are mature enough to understand what marriage 
entails . While parents demand respect and young adults demand autonomy, they both need a 
middle ground where both can voice their opinions and their communication can flourishes. 
Parents are usually concerned that their young adults are not prepared enough for marriage, 
especially when it comes to understanding the opposite gender. At the same time, g ender 
interactions and expectations have drastically changed  recently, which affects the marriage 
process for both parents and young adults. Parents want to be involved and respected in the 
marriage process and understand that they should grant their young adults more autonomy as 
they become more mature and aware o f the changes in gender roles and expectations.  
 
5.2.1 Respect ing Parents vs.  Young Adults' Autonomy . Parents want to balance between granting 
their young adults'  autonom y and maintaining their respected role in society.  Young adults 
choos ing who they marry helps maintain a healthy relationship with their parents . Parents value 
their young adults' autonomy and privacy, which was unheard of in previous generations . Parents 
seek their young adults trust to keep them aware about their technologic al interactions. That 
given, parents expect young adults to respect their opinions when they disagree and hope to reach 
a mutual understanding when it comes to choosing a potential spouse. Parents could resort to 
utilizing their legal or social authority w hen their young adults are not cooperating with them. 
Finding a middle ground where young adults can make their own decisions and parents' opinions 
are respected is a constant struggle.  
Young adults should be able to decide who they want to marry  as it could make the marriage 
process easier and maintains a healthy relationship between parent s and young adults . Parents 
might consider young adults finding their own spouse as relieving their parents from the burden 
of finding a suitable spouse  for them . A father, P1, says “I have children and give them total 
freedom...they went and searched and made it easier for me. ” Parents believe that their intervention 
is limited to providing advice and it is up to young adults to decide to take it or leave it. At the 
same time, parents believe that young adults need their support and guidance as they explore 
alternative methods. A mother, P 14, says “a person might accept alternative methods for marriage 
and young adults need the family and their support and guidanc e.” Parents do not want to threaten 
their relationship with their young adults because of disagreement on who the young adults want 
to marry.211:16 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . “I cannot intervene except by simply advising but he is free. He would be a man. Fully and mentally aware 
of his  choices …I am not ready to lose my daughter or her love because of this…her decision and she does 
what she wants. I respect it. She did not like the advice, she does what she wants. ” P15b 
Parents intervening too much in the marriage process undermines youn g adults' autonomy. 
Parents cannot claim that their young adults can choose who to marry if they need their approval 
in the process. A father, P7, explains “If the son or daughter need approval, then it means they are 
not given the full authority…the probl em of choosing a spouse is that the mother and father 
intervene. ” Parents realize that times have changed and what was acceptable for them is not 
necessarily acceptable for their children. A mother, P15b, explains “The usual abuse that is the 
pressure of [ parents] on their [young adults] in deciding a suitable spouse for them. Our time, me and 
their dad, is different from their time. ” Young adults should be granted autonomy by being able to 
preserve some privacy in their personal lives away from their paren ts to build some trust between 
them  when it comes to marriage .  
“I do not know everything about them …I do not have any of my children on snapchat and do not want to 
know it because I tell them spying is not a way. Because the prophet says do not spy …Trust is needed. ” P2 
Parents realize that they must  open communication channels between them and their young 
adults to be involved in the technological marriage process. If parents  try to prevent their young 
adults from utilizing technology for marriage, they wi ll find ways to do it without their 
knowledge. It is better for parents to support their young adults to remain in the loop. A father, 
P9, explains “If they are doing it anyways, do not be an obstacle. At least they would inform you 
about it. ” Parents also  realize that restrictions that were given during their time no longer apply 
and that they need to adapt to the change to remain relevant. A father, P3, says “In our time it was 
unacceptable to talk to your father in this manner…The change that is happening is not in your 
hands. You either get along with it and see the positive aspects or… ”  Parents want their young adults 
to trust them and keep them informed about their technological marriage endeavors.  
“I try to build trust between me and them. S o, they can tell me what they are doing. Know how they are 
using this technology. Are they using it appropriately? Maybe they went in a different or wrong direction.  
Building trust between me and my children is really important. ” P12 
Young adults are expec ted to do their part too by respecting their parents' opinions when they  
disagree . Parents understand that their young adults might leave them out when they know 
parents would not approve of their actions. A mother, P2, says “She does not consult her mothe r 
because she does not like her mother’s opinions …I will not tell you because you will say no. ” Parents 
want to maintain a space for dialog where parents and young adults discuss and attempt to 
persuade each other without either of them imposing their opin ion on the other. A mother, P12, 
explains “Young adults would try to convince their family that this choice is the most suitable…there 
would be acceptance from both ends and room for dialog and not imposing opinions on each other. ” 
Parents want to be respe cted by their young adults to reach a middle ground where both are 
satisfied.  
 “I cannot prevent my boys and girls because they are old and make their own decisions, but the family have 
their respect in our society and the authority to reject or accept. I cannot tell my son not to do it but if I am 
not satisfied, he will reconsider ” P13 
When parents' opinions were disregarded by young adults, parents may resort to using their 
authority to assert their opinions. This appli es to daughters as fathers still hav e the legal authority 
to approve or disapprove of the marriage. This has not changed with the recent changes in male 
guardianship laws to one of the father's relief, P8, as he says,  “They still have  not removedSaudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:17 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . guardianship for marriage. ” The parents reali ze that they cannot intervene like they used to in the 
past, but their legal authority for their daughters is their last resort.  
“In the past the family intervenes...today no, they cannot. It is his personal decision; he deals with it. No, the 
girl you can  refuse, why? Because some things are in your hand. The boy no, his matters are in his hands. ” 
P5 
Conclusion.  Young adults' autonomy is important when it comes to deciding who they marry,  
and parents believe their opinions can be valuable when making that decision. Parents worr y that 
young adults would exclude them from the process when they decide who to marry. Parents want 
to grant their young adults'  autonomy but also prevent them from making bad decisions. Parents 
also refer to how family dynamics have changed compared to the past where their own parents 
had more influence on them when it came to marriage. Nonetheless, parents expect their young 
adults to make decisions that do not go a gainst their parents' wishes . This section addresses some 
of the concerns that  Saudi Arabian parents have about using marital matchmaking technologies 
(RQ1). While it is up to young adults to decide who they marry, parents can provide  them  with 
guidance an d advice to make the right decision.  
 
5.2.2 Young adults need to be educated  about the opposite gender . Parents are concerned that 
their young adults are not mature and prepared for marriage especially when it comes to 
understanding the opposite gender and  sexual interactions. Parents are worried that their young 
adults cannot  handle the responsibility that comes with marriage as their view of it is superficial. 
Another thing parent are worried about is that young adults need to have set and clear goals and  
make sure they do not conflict with their potential partner. Parents want to find a suitable way to 
educate their young adults about the opposite gender and sex. Parents related to their own 
experiences on how they were not educated properly about sex and  how it affected their marriage. 
Parents wanted to ensure that their young adults have a positive experience with their marriage 
and avoid mistakes that parents have committed in their own marriages especially for a culturally 
sensitive topic like sex.  
Parents are  worried that their young adults do not understand what marriage entails and view 
it superficially, which leads to divorce or a negative experience. If a young adult cannot  manage 
their own individual responsibilities, they are not prepared to get  married. A mother, P2, explains 
“Who cannot handle responsibility cannot be trusted even for traditional marriage. ” Young adults 
must understand what their goals are before they decide to get married. This would help them 
understand themselves better and avoid divorce that could be caused by potential spouses' goals 
not being compatible. A father, P9, says “It is better  that everyone knows their goals…because first 
you would educate the person. Second, decrease divorce rates ” Parents do not believe that 
incompatible goals mean  that potential spouses are not suitable for each other but rather that it 
would make the marria ge tougher. A mother, P2, says “When they have shared goals,  they can 
accomplish them quickly…but if they are different, they might struggle a bit, take time. ” Parents are 
generally concerned that young adults have a distorted view about marriage and do no t realize 
that until it is too late.  
“Marriage is not brand names and travel. I know a woman who married and went to France and bought 
everything she wanted and when she came back, she asked for divorce and said he is not suitable. Because he 
refused to bu y a Rolex watch worth $40k …she does  not know that marriage is a responsibility ” P4  
While parents find that sexual education is essential for a successful marriage, they are 
concerned about how it would be gained appropriately. Islam stipulates sexual guid elines in 
marriage and parents are concerned that some might not be aware of them as P3 says  “For the211:18 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . religious limits in sexual interactions, some might make a mistake .” and he considers sexual 
education through religion as appropriate “if they are religi ously educated, they would be modestly 
sexually educated. ” In addition, sexual  education is not mandated in Saudi Arabian schools  and 
parents called for programs to fill the gap. Parents were against potential spouses discussing 
sexual matters with the opposite gender before marriage as P13 says “Our religion, values and 
customs do not allow cross gender dialog about [sex] ” and P8 adds “Maybe they will say what about 
[premarital sex]? ” Parents reflect ed on their previous marriage experience s and admit that they 
could have benefitted from being educated properly about sex before marriage.  A lack of sexual 
education could lead to a horrible marriage experience or a divorce that could have been avoided.  
 “What ruined traditional marriages is [ the lack of sexual education] …Now I teach my daughter  because it is 
essential for a successful marriage. It ruined some of our marriages because we were not educated .” P2  
Even though it is important for potential spou ses to understand each other's sexual needs, it 
was not appropriate for it to be to be the only priority. When the process starts with sex as the 
driving factor, “it will lose the credibility of both being serious ” according to P10. At the same time, 
given  how sex is a sensitive topic in a conservative country like Saudi Arabia, potential spouses 
would be reluctant to share details about it. P7 states “I do not think anyone will give a real answer ” 
when it came to how sex would be addressed for potential sp ouse, even though he agrees that it is 
a valid and important concern for potential spouses. Sex should come after other more important 
goals that would be achieved through marriage such as creating a family.  
“The goal is to create a family, not pleasure…se xual pleasure should be secondary, not primary. Tranquility 
is important. You need comfort more than pleasure. ” P5 
Conclusion.  Being mature and properly educated about marital responsibilities and priorities 
can make or break a marriage. Parents consider t heir young adults as irresponsible and not well 
educated about what a marriage requires. Parents are worried that their young adults are not fully 
aware of their actions  and would only realize their mistake when it is too late. Marital 
matchmaking technologies role should ensure that potential spouses are aware of what marriage 
entails before they decide on a suitable spouse (RQ2).  
 
5.2.3 Change of g ender expectations, roles and interactions . Previous generations had strict er 
gender segregation  rules in public spaces and defined gender roles in marriage. This made 
interacting with the opposite gender  before marriage unlikely especially when meeting online was 
not an option. Young adults nowadays are more likely to interact with th e opposite gender before 
marriage in public spaces as many Saudi women are joining the workforce. It has changed how 
they approach marriage and decide who they marry as gender roles have drastically changed and 
can no longer be assumed .  In addition, onlin e platforms allowed them to freely express their 
opinions, thoughts, identities, and different perceptions to the opposite gender. The increase in 
gender interactions has given young adults more opportunities to choose who they marry 
independently, but the  process became more nuance with gender roles becoming more fluid rather 
than agreed upon.  
The change in gender interactions has made traditional marriages undesirable for young adults 
as it usually means their interaction with the opposite gender is limit ed and controlled by their 
parents. Parents have realized that y oung adults are not interested in traditional marriages  as a 
mother, P12, finds it a sequence of them being “more aware ” of alternative options . She points out 
that young adults have opportuni ties that were “not available for previous generations ”, and it 
therefor e “became easier to choose through interactions between genders, which now became more 
prevalent. ” This also shows that  the case of gender interactions being  “more prevalent ” seems toSaudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:19 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . justify it. T his subtle sense of justification can be easily questioned, as parents tend to explain why 
genders mixing can be beneficial, even when they are against it . “I am honestly against mixing and 
openness, but there is one advantage. That you get to  know the other before anything happens ”, says 
P4, a mother. Her phrase  “before anything happens ” shows a case where parents do not accept 
relationships as experiences, but as projects that lead to marriage. And where if the relationship is 
not to last; it  shall not start.  P4 also highlights that when cross -gender interact occur, potential 
spouses can evaluate each other intellectually , “when you accept the person it is because you knew 
them intellectually. ” Even though gender interactions are limited to c ertain settings such as work 
and school , these settings create a perfect environment for potential spouses to  evaluate  each 
other.  Technology that is utilized for school or work makes it easier for potential spouses to 
transition to marriage eventually. Th e prevalence of technology and cross -gender interactions 
allows and encourages young adults to seek alternative ways to find a suitable spouse that would 
not be available in a traditional marriage.  
 “The next generation will marry through technology …They s tarted to talk with each other for work or 
school …the mature guy and gal will think about marriage because it is the goal for a proper relationship. ” P2 
Even though gender expectations about modesty and genders mixing are chang ing in Saudi 
Arabia, parents believe  there is no  consensus  on them and that they can vary from one family to 
another. For example, a mother, P4, believes that “As long as she has not married, she must be 
modest .” At the same time, she finds it reasonable that “When she has children and becomes a 
mother… as she grows, she break s boundaries .” Becoming a mother seems to loosen the expectations 
that are enforced on women as they are considered more mature. Another example is a mother, 
P2, stating that “Some do not like it if their brother s come and she goes inside. No, cover up and stay 
with us ” as some families find it acceptable that genders mix as long as modesty is maintained. On 
the other hand, she states that women covering  is changing and that “In the meantime, most girls 
do not cov er…they must get into the details. ” She highlights that it is important to discuss 
expectations to ensure that there is no conflict between potential spouses. With recent changes in 
gender dynamics, potential spouses need to discuss their expectations and validate their 
assumptions to avoid any conflict in their future marriage  and how they raise their own children . 
“Dad’s principle is that his daughters cover up in a certain way or they do not show their face. The [mother]  
is from a family that were raised  on showing their face and consider it normal. Here is a conflict of 
principles. It will cause a disagreement in the marriage. It is better that it is clear from the beginning. ” P12 
The traditional role of husbands being breadwinners has become controversial with the 
increase of Saudi Arabian  women joining the workforce . A mother, P12, states that “[Women] 
gained a form of independence ” and adds that “[they do] not need a husband ” as she compares it to 
traditional roles where wives were dependent on their husbands. At the same time, she believes 
that “for the man, nothing has changed ” as the husband  is still expected to be the breadwinner, 
even if their wife is employed. A s a result , she concludes that “the burden remains on the man in 
marriage .” A mother, P2, explains that it is important to discuss financial expectations when both 
spouses are employed “even if it might be hurtful ” as she believes that “it is normal to be 
transparent. ” It is worth noting that from an Islamic perspective, husbands are expected to provide 
for their wives [39], even if the wife is fin ancially well -off. However , some cultural practices and 
Islamic rulings provide room for negotiations between spouses where income might be shared 
[84]. As potential spouses' sharing their expenses and incomes is still controversial in the public 
sphere,  it is important that they  discuss and clarify their financial roles and expectations  in 
marriage .211:20 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . “A guy might say I am responsible to spend even if she is employed and another says if you are employed, I 
will not spend on you…it is not right or wrong but him or her decide based on that. A woman might say…if I 
[am employed] my money is mine. Maybe it is hers, but another person might say no, that does not wor k.” 
P7 
Saudi Arabian w omen's traditional role of being caretakers of the household is being 
challenged when they choose to work. As state d by a father, P3, some men “[believe] that a woman 
does not leave the house ” but he believes this creates a conflict a s when “she is employed, it is 
impossible that [they] are compatible .” He also links it to the man attempting to protect his 
authority in the marriage by stating that “some men do not want her to work…[they want] to be 
controlling and the guardian. ” Even when women working does not affect men's authority in the 
marriage, fathers believe there is a clash between mothers working and raising their children . As a 
father , P1, says that it is  “better to clarify she wants to work or not .” He highlights the issue of 
childcare that would conflict with the mother working “The issue when she works is where to put 
the children .” It is important to note that childcare for working women is a relatively new concept 
in Saudi Arabia, which means it is not always avail able or affordable . As a result, P1, argues that 
“if he is satisfied that she works, the children could be delayed. ” His statements demonstrate  his 
perception of a separated role of motherhood and work for mothers , and that if a woman wants 
both, having ch ildren would be postponed . Parents believe that it is important to discuss gender 
roles as the assumed traditional roles are no longer salient in Saudi Arabia.  
Conclusion.  With Saudi Arabia's public sphere changing rapidly in the last couple of years, 
cross-gender interaction and gender roles and expectations have changed drastically. Parents are 
aware that these differences did not exist during their time and realize it is important for young 
adults to be transparent about them as it definitely would affec t their future marriage. As a result, 
it is important for marital matchmaking technolog ies to take into account these changes and 
ensure that potential spouses are aware of them and how they may be perceived differently by 
different potential spouses (RQ2) . 
5.3 Concern s About Technolog y's Risks, Reliability and Regulation  
There were many concerns that technology could be used inappropriately or abused by young 
adults or others. These concerns stem from not being familiar with marital matchmaking 
technologies, which causes parents to be fearful of them. In addition, information found online 
was questionable and usually unreliable for young adults to make informed decisions when 
looking for a suitable spou se online. As a result, regulating the use of technology was considered 
as a suitable method to make finding a spouse online more effective for young adults. These 
concerns made parents feel hesitant about their young adults utilizing technology to find a 
suitable spouse . 
 
5.3.1 Afraid of Potential Technological Harms . Parents were fearful about their young adults 
utilizing technology to find a potential spouse  online.  Their fears were mainly around three 
aspects: not trusting strangers and the potential ha rm they may cause , worrying that their 
daughters are more susceptible to harms online , being uncertain about potential spouses' 
seriousness about marriage . 
“I do not think our society is fully aware how to use technology…that it could be beneficial, effect ive and 
safe…I think it needs time. ” P10 
Parents worried about young adults seeking potential spouses online since they are not familiar 
with it and could not fully trust strangers online . Parents were skeptical of this unfamiliar way toSaudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:21 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . get married. A father, P1, says he  “Never heard of people who got married via technology ” and a 
mother, P11, rejects it by saying “I did not believe in this thing, and do not support it .” Even though 
she has heard that some people found this method successful, she argues  that “it is not suitable for 
our community. ” Another  mother , P13,  argues that her concerns stem from the fear of the 
unknown “I cannot guarantee the manners of people who will communicate with my sons and 
daughters .” Her fear of the unknown is linked to t he fear of the potential harm  as she says,  “I do 
not know how it would affect our family’s privacy if they get in touch with a stranger .” When 
parents are not sure how finding a potential spouse online will pan out or who is behind it, they 
are usually mor e fearful than they are hopeful  as it is considered an unexplored territory for them 
and they want to become more familiar with it .  
 “Even though I do not expect it…it might become a phenomenon and I would like to be aware of it… there 
might be something positive or good. We always focus on the negatives. ” P8 
The fear of the unknown is more sensitive for most parents when it comes to t heir daughters  
searching for a spouse online compared to their sons as they view it to be riskier .  One mother, 
P12, argues that “the girl might be deceived or embarrassed or someone might manipulate her with 
words ” and as a result  “she would need guidance  and monitoring from the family to avoid mistakes or 
being a victim. ” A father, P15a, supports this by saying “[women] are emotional about their 
decisions ” but a mother , P15b, argues otherwise “I do not agree with this. Boys are emotional and 
make wrong ch oices too.” These conflicting perceptions might be related to the changes in cross 
gender interactions that were almost non -existent during the time of the parents. A mother, P15b, 
says “5 years ago, I used to think differently ” as she realizes that her pe rception has change over 
time. Nonetheless, parents are more cautious when their daughters utilize marital matchmaking 
technologies to interacting with potential spouses that are strangers.  
Parents are worried that marital matchmaking are not utilized for marriage and lack the 
serious ness that is present in the traditional process. A father, P9, believes that “some people are 
serious about marriage on these websites,  but the other side might be doing it for fun. ” A mother , P12,  
supports this by saying that “[young adults] use it for fun but not for marriage. ” A mother, P11, says 
she is willing to reconsider her position on marital matchmaking technologies  “If he proposes 
directly and showed himself from the beginning to us, I might change my mind. ” This is s upported by 
a father, P6, who draws the line by saying “if he did not propose to your dad, eliminate him ” as he 
considers the proposal as serious step in the right direction. He continues by saying that “Some 
bad people took advantage of [technology] . They  used it to blackmail. ” On the other hand, he also 
believes that “not everyone who uses technological means is bad…there are respectful people. ” 
Determining if a user of a marital matchmaking technology is serious about marriage is crucial 
and challenging for parents compared to the traditional process.  
Conclusion.  Parents are concerned that using technology to find a potential spouse is risky . This 
concern is mostly  rooted in  the uncertainty that comes from interact ing with unknown potential 
spouses. While  parents are willing to be more open minded, they still cannot fully trust 
technology. Compared to the traditional marriage process, these potential spouses'  intentions are 
not clear for young adults and parents (RQ1).  
 
5.3.2 Concern s About Information Reliability . Deception  or lack of transparency and seriousness 
are concern s that arise when young adults seek a potential spouse online.   The traditional method 
relies on meeting potential spouse s in person to validate their information  and seriousness . Since 
technology lacks that aspect, parents are reluctant to trust information that is provided by 
technology without meeting potential spouses in person. A father, P9, explains “Sometimes they211:22 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . doubt the available information if they do not meet and know. ” The concern is that potential spouses 
might attempt to present themselves in a positive light, which might involve deception and 
questions their credibility. “There is no credibility ” as a mother, P4, states. She believes that “the 
man always lies or makes h imself perfect ” and her concerned is that “she believes him .” Nonetheless, 
P4 realize and admits that “the problem here is the people and not technology .” Deception might not 
always be intentional as information presented online is  usually selective, especially in Saudi 
Arabia where not all opinions are respected equally. A father, P7 says “Even if it was real, it would 
be partial…our community is not open to accept all opinions. ” In some cases, the concern is that 
potential spouses  are not serious or transparent enough when providing information to potential 
spouses online. This makes the process less effective when potential spouses have different levels 
of seriousness and transparency. A father, P10, explains “Those using technolo gy must be serious 
when providing their information and be transparent and precise for it to be effective. ” Parents are 
concerned that their young adults are not cautious enough about the authenticity of information 
provided by potential spouses online and  if potential spouses are actually serious about marriage 
online.  
Misusing or abusing technology when seeking a spouse online is a concern as it may lead to 
young adults being blackmailed. Parents linked the misuse of technology to it being accepted by 
the community as a mother P2 states “Misuse, we have to underline it. Also, community acceptance. ” 
Since using technology for marriage is a new concept, parents are concerned it may be utilized for 
extortion. “It might have greed or extortion ” as a father, P5  states. He believes that “because it is new 
and those who use it…use it negatively ” but he is also hopeful that at some point “when something 
becomes successful, people will follow. ” Parent hope that there is a way to prevent blackmail and 
exploitation an d believe it is reliant on protecting young adults' information appropriately. A 
father, P7 supports this by saying  “You need to do it in a way so that nobody can exploit or 
blackmail. You need to find a method to not allow a person to take people’s infor mation. ” Parents are 
concerned that technology might be utilized by others to inflict harm on their young adults, which 
causes them to discourage their young adults from finding a potential spouse through technology 
until it is proven successful.  
Conclusio n. Parents are worried that finding a  potential spouse online is lacks transparency and 
could cause harm for their young adults. Measures need to be taken to increase transparency and 
minimize technological misuse. Marital matchmaking technologies must inc orporate these 
measures to be effective (RQ1).  
 
5.3.3 Regulation of technology is needed for it to be effective . Regulating marital matchmaking 
technologies was suggested by parents to circumvent their concerns and worries  about their 
young adults'  safety and adherence to religious guidelines . This could be done by involving a 
mediator that would oversee the process and ensure that it is properly conducted. The mediator 
could be a private entity or a public entity such as the government. T he governm ent is viewed as 
an authority that would prevent any misuse  and is trusted by Saudi Arabians. Other ways of 
regulation were related to how marital matchmaking technologies restricted users from certain 
actions that could lead to misuse. While regulation mi ght seem restrictive  and intrusive , it helps 
create a safe environment for young adults to seek potential spouses without worrying about 
being harmed  or compromising their religious beliefs . 
Having a trusted authority that regulates  marital matchmaking technology is considered a 
safety net that would prevent unacceptable behavior that would occur between potential spouses. 
Unacceptable behavior might relate  to general misuse of technology or violating cultural andSaudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:23 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . religious expectations. A father, P6, belie ves that “Not every source is trustworthy ” when 
questioning who is behind a marital matchmaking technology as he believes that a “[well known] 
sheikh or a government entity ” is considered a trustworthy source. I t is important that the those  
“who run them a re known ” according to a mother, P2. She believes it  guarantees that they are not  
those  “who might leak information ” as marital matchmaking technologies “[have] confidential info .” 
As a result, the government or a trusted entity implementing the marital matchmaking technology 
is “more assuring for parents ” according to a mother, P12, as she thinks it ensures that “there is no 
manipulation. ” On the other hand, a father, P15a, is concerned that corruption within government 
entities could allow people to “know loopholes in the system [and abuse them]. ” At the same time, 
he believes that “if it was a private entity? It would be more negative. ” It is important that the entity 
that implements a marital matchmaking technology in Saudi Ara bia is known and trusted, which 
is more likely to be a public entity rather than a private one.  
Limiting interactions on a marital matchmaking system can prevent misuse and ensure that 
interactions are aligned with religious values. While interacting with multiple potential spouses at 
the same time is consider an advantage, it could be a distraction from finding a suitable spouse. A 
mother, P4, says “after choosing a specific person, there would be no options until I am done with 
them. ” She believes that a potential spouse should be evaluated appropriately before moving on to 
another  potential spouse. In addition, t his would minimize abuse as  a father, P7, says “You need a 
strategy to not allow a user to be a player. ” He believes that limiting a user's actio ns would prevent 
them from abusing the system. Even if users are not abusing the system, they might get distracted 
by the available options. “Why get distracted? ” says a mother, P15b, as she believes young adults 
should focus on one person at a time and no t “get to know 100 people at the same time. ” A father, 
P8, links this to religion as “the prophet said do not propose on your brother’s proposal .” He 
considers potential spouses interacting with each other as a form of proposal between them and 
proposals should not be simultaneous. Marital matchmaking technologies can minimize misuse 
and preserve religious values by controlling what actions are available for users.  
Conclusion.  Marital matchmaking technologies should be regulated by a public entity with 
limited interactions between users. This would make marital matchmaking technologies safer and 
more aligned with Saudi Arabian religious values (RQ2).  
6 DISCUSSION  
Our findings indicate that parents want their young adults to preserve religious and cultural 
values, keep parents involved when choosing who they want to marry and understand that 
parents are attempting to help young adults remain safe in the  technological facilitated process . 
We explain how these finding can gui de future work and the design of suitable marital 
matchmaking technologies in Muslim and Arab cultures.  
6.1 Technology Should be R eligious ly and Cultural ly Inclusive  
As technology is usually perceived to be disruptive, parents were concerned that religious and 
cultural values would be compromised when young adults utilized marital matchmaking 
technologies to find a suitable spouse. Technology does not need to be disrup tive to be successful 
as a previous study [65] indicated that adhering to traditional cultural values has led to 
matrimonial matchmaking websites being  more successful than dating websites.  
Our finding suggest th at parents  believed that marital matchmaking technologies should 
coexist with the traditional process as they would complement each other. The traditional process 
could benefit from the ease of access to information in marital matchmaking technologies. At the211:24 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . same time, parents were worried that sharing too much information online could harm their 
young adults. Partial a nonymity allows young adults to exchange religious and cultural 
information to determine compatibility. This ensures that they protect their privacy and 
reputation since no identifiable data is shared.  This partial anonymity would gradually fade away 
as more private information is exchanged between potential spouses to determine if they are 
individually compatible and transition to the tradit ional process. The implementation of partial 
anonymity that ensures a smooth transition from online to offline needs further exploration to 
understand it better.  
6.2 Involve  Other Stakeholders  in Matchmaking Technologies  
Parents want to be involved in the marriage process and maintain a good relationship with their 
young adults. While parents believe young adults could benefit from their guidance and wisdom, 
they understand that it is important for their young adults to in dependently decide who they want 
to marry. Parents demand to be respected stems from the concept of bir alwalidayn , which does 
not require that that young adults lose their autonomy. Finding a balance where parents can be 
involved in a marital matchmaking system without threatening young adults'  autonomy is 
complicated. As parents have mentioned different variations within Saudi Arabia n culture , 
parents'  involvement in marital matchmaking technologies is not uniformly unique .  
Our findings indicate that p arents consider involvement to be either  collaborative or 
transactional. An example for collaborative involvement is where parents mentioned that they 
would keep in touch with their young adults throughout the process by being aware of their 
actions and prov iding them with guidance. For transactional involvement, parents would vet 
potential spouses found online and transition to the traditional process to make things official. 
Collaborative involvement is not clearly defined compared to transactional involvem ent that is an 
extension of the traditional process. As a result, collaborative involvement c ould be determined 
through discuss ions and negotiat ions between parents and young adults  while transactional 
involvement would be  defined based on certain phases in the matchmaking process.  Implementing 
these types of involvement in a technological system may assume that young adults need to 
cooperate with their parents. An alternative would be a negotiation system where young adults 
and their parents have different  access based  on their agreed upon level of  parental involvement. 
For example, young adults could propose potential spouses to their parents to get initial feedback 
or parents may suggest potential spouses for their young adults to consider.   
Both types of  involvement would require further investigation to understand how they would 
be implemented in a marital matchmaking technology  in Saudi Arabia . Even though there are 
existing marital matchmaking technologies for Muslims that have considered  parents' 
transactional involvement (i.e. Minder), there have not been any studies in the HCI community 
that have explored their effectiveness in Muslim and Arab cultures and if they can be improved. 
Previous studies [65] have explored forms of collaborative involvement for Indian matrimonial 
websites. To the best of our knowledge, there have no t been many  studies in the HCI community 
that explor e how collaborative involvement can be affective  in matrimonial websites  for Mu slim 
and Arab cultures. In general, we encourage the HCI community to investigate involving other 
stakeholders in matchmaking technologies as previous studies [49] have shown that matchmaking 
technologies benefit from having a “community. ” We also encourage the HCI community to 
conduct more inclusive investigations , as mentioned by Sharma et al . [65], with understudied 
populations such as Muslims and Arabs .Saudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:25 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . 6.3 Regulation of M atchmaking Technologies  Makes Them Safer  
Given that marital matchmaking technologies are not widely used in Saudi Arabia, parents are 
concern about them being safe and reliable . Some of these concerns have been mentioned in many 
previous studies [26,36,63]  and are not unique to the Saudi Arabian context. However, these 
concerns are perceived differen tly when viewed through cultural and religious lens.  
Our participants have mentioned involving the government  to make marital matchmaking 
technologies safer , which has been shown to be successful in previous studies  [65]. Unfortunately, 
the Saudi Arabian government has not been involved in any marital matchmaking technologies so 
far. This opens an opportunity to explore alternatives on how matchmaking technologies can 
emulate the government's involvement . A previous study by Masden and Edwards  [49] mentioned 
how a community fo r dating sites might serve as a form of regulation similar to how Wikipedia 
articles are regulated. It is also possible that other stakeholders (i.e. family or friends)  can be part 
of the community that regulates matchmaking technologies. This might serve as a suitable 
alternative for involving the government in matchmaking technologies, even though it lacks the 
authority to prosecute users.  
Our findings indicate that information reliability and validity  is another concern for parents . 
One way to address it is by providing a verification mechanism by matchmaking technologies 
similar to how Indian matrimonial websites verify users through their phone numbers and official 
documents [65] or other online platforms such  as AirBnB [85]. It is not clear if these mechanisms 
can be implemented in Saudi Arabia as having a copy of a Saudi na tional ID card is prohibited by 
the Saudi Arabian ministry of interior [86]. Even though using a Saudi national ID for verification 
might be problematic, verification through phone numbers is a suitable alternative since all phone 
numbers are required by law to be linked to a Saudi National ID5 [87]. Further investigations are 
needed to explore if these verification methods are possible and effective.  
6.4 HCI Feminism  
Previous work has introduced 6 core qualities for feminist HCI and the pl uralism quality is the 
most relevant to our study [20]. While individualistic cultures value being independent, collectivist 
cultures  value collaboration.  Parents expressed more concerns ab out their daughters being safe 
when using technology for marriage and fathers were more likely intervene in their daughters' 
decision -making  process. While these might seem restrictive from a Western standpoint, it could 
be viewed as favorable for some Ara b and Muslim women. Even when Saudi Arabian  Women are 
against parents controlling who they marry , they still adhere to Islamic and religious guidelines . 
Feminist ideology and talking about “private matters ” is considered socially unacceptable in Saudi 
Arab ia. As a result, Saudi Arabian women have to construct their own version of Islamic 
Feminism   [11,38,54]  where they define what women's empowerment means in a patriarchal and 
Islamic society . For example, Saudi Arabian women might avoid going against their fathers in a 
case of 'adhl  as they view following their father's wishes falls under bir alwalidayn . It does not 
mean that they do not value being able to choose who to marry, but rather give priority to their 
Islamic obligation to respect their parents.  In fact, some Saudi Arabian women have stated that 
“Islam has freed women before the West comes with its conventions ” as a protest against the term 
“feminism ” [38]. While Saudi Arabian women still face many challenges  in Saudi Arabia , they 
                                                                 
5 Saudi Arabia's communication and information technology commission  also provides a service to check phone numbers linked to a 
Saudi National ID to prevent it from being misused211:26 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . prefer to tackle them while adhering to cultural and religious values as they consider this 
approach to be  more socially accept able. 
6.5 Limitations  
One limitation of our study was the use of Twitter, word -of-mouth. and snowball sampling to 
recruit.  While we aimed to recruit  a diverse set of participants, most participants were either 
acquainted with the author s through some channel  or tech -savvy  enough to have found out about 
this study via Twitter . We had limited access to participants who did not meet those  
characteristics.   
Due to the snowball sampling, o ur participants were not representative of the Saudi Arabian 
population  geographically . Even though we attempted to recruit participants from Eastern region, 
which is one of the three  major regions in Saudi  Arabia, we were not successful.  
Perhaps due to the bias introduced by recruiting via Twitter, m ost of our participants were 
open and accepting of using technology for marriage in Saudi Arabia. We are certain that there 
are Saudi Arabian parents that are more strongly against using technology for marriage , but they 
did not take part in our study.  Thus, o ur findings may be skewed towards Saudi Arabian  parents  
that are in favor of using technology for marriage.  
Finally, w e realize that there are secondary stakeholders and topics that we were not able to 
include in our investigation given its current scope,  such as siblings or extended family members  
and the topic of polygamy . These secondary stakeholders might also serve as mediators between 
young adults and their parents , especially when parents are against using technology for 
marriage . While polygamy  is practiced in Saudi Arabia, only one  father and one mother from our 
participants brought it up when relating to their ow n experiences.  
7 CONCLUSION  
Our study has explore d how Saudi Arabian parents perceive marital matchmaking technologies and what role 
they want play in them . Our interviews with 16 Saudi Arabian parents revealed that it is important to 
preserv e Saudi Arabia n values within marital matchmaking technologies, find ways for technology to coexist  
with the traditional marriage process and minimize potential harms through regulat ion. Our findings provide 
insights to guide the HCI community  to be more culturally sensitive  and inclusive , which aims  to understand 
and account for human values in the design  process.  We also provide implications on how to design 
matchmaking technologies in this context  based on pr eserving values, involving parents and ensuring young 
adults' safety . We outlined different avenues  for future investigations in this context and provide our 
solution s. With this work, we provide a contextually grounded  research study to benefit  the future work of 
value -sensitive design in the CSCW community.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
We would like to thank all participants for their time and sharing their insights with us.  A special thanks for 
all reviewers that helped improve our paper. Rana Alhanaya's help in translating consent forms and questions 
during IRB procedures was greatly appreciated . 
REFERENCES  
[1] Norah Abokhodair, Sofiane Abbar, Sarah Vieweg, and Yelena Mejova. 2016. Privacy and Twitter in 
Qatar: Traditional Valu es in the Digital World. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Web 
Science  (WebSci ’16), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 66 –77. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2908131.2908146  
[2] Norah Abokhodair, Adam Hodges, and Sarah Vieweg. 2017. Photo Sharing in the Arab Gulf: 
Expressing the Collective and Autonomous Selves. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference onSaudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:27 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing  (CSCW ’17), ACM, N ew York, NY, USA, 
696–711. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998338  
[3] Norah Abokhodair and Sarah Vieweg. 2016. Privacy & Social Media in the Context of the Arab Gulf. In 
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , ACM Pres s DIS 2016, 672 –
683. 
[4] Adel Al -Dawood, Norah Abokhodair, Houda El mimouni, and Svetlana Yarosh. 2017. “Against 
Marrying a Stranger ”: Marital Matchmaking Technologies in Saudi Arabia. In Proceedings of the 2017 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems  (DIS ’17), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1013 –1024. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3064663.3064683  
[5] Kecia Ali. 2015. Sexual Ethics and Islam: Feminist Reflections on Qur’an, Hadith and Jurisprudence . 
Oneworld Publications.  
[6] Salwa Abdel Hameed Al -Khateeb. 1998 . Women, Family and the Discovery of Oil in Saudi Arabia. 
Marriage Fam. Rev.  27, 1–2 (April 1998), 167 –189. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1300/J002v27n01_11  
[7] Hashem Abdullah Almakrami. 2015. Online Self - Disclosure Across Cultures: A Study of Facebook Use 
in Saudi Arabia and Australia. Doctoral dissertation. Queensland University of Technology.  
[8] Tahani Obaid M. Alruwaili. 2017. Self Identity and Community Through Social Media: The Experience 
of Saudi Female International College Students in the United States . Ph.D. University of Northern 
Colorado, United States -- Colorado.  
[9] Yeslam Al -Saggaf. 2011. Saudi females on Facebook: An ethnographic study. Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Soc.  
9, 1 (2011), 1.  
[10] Yeslam Al -Saggaf. 2016. An Exploratory Study of Attitudes To wards Privacy in Social Media and the 
Threat of Blackmail: The Views of a Group of Saudi Women. Electron. J. Inf. Syst. Dev. Ctries.  75, (July 
2016). DOI:https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1681 -4835.2016.tb00549.x  
[11] Tamara Alsheikh, Jennifer A. Rode, and Siân E.  Lindley. 2011. (Whose) Value -sensitive Design: A 
Study of Long - Distance Relationships in an Arabic Cultural Context. In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work  (CSCW ’11), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 75 –84. 
DOI:https://d oi.org/10.1145/1958824.1958836  
[12] Soraya Altorki. 1977. Family Organization and Women’s Power in Urban Saudi Arabian Society. J. 
Anthropol. Res.  33, 3 (October 1977), 277 –287. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1086/jar.33.3.3630009  
[13] Anne Aula and Sasha Lubomirs ky. 2008. Blocked Sites and Offensive Videos: The Challenges of Teen 
Computer Use. In CHI ’08 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI EA ’08), 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2757 –2762. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1358628.1358757  
[14] Ayman B ajnaid and Yeslam Al -Saggaf. 2017. Impression Formation on Matrimonial Sites. In 
Proceedings of the 29th Australian Conference on Computer -Human Interaction  (OZCHI ’17), ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 77 –86. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3152771.3152780  
[15] Ayman Naji Bajnaid. 2016. A Study of Online Impression Formation, Mate Preferences and Courtship 
Scripts among Saudi Users of Matrimonial Websites. PhD Thesis. Department of Media and 
Communication.  
[16] Ayman Naji Bajnaid and Tariq Elyas. 2017. Exploring the Ph enomena of Online Dating Platforms 
Versus Saudi Traditional Spouse Courtship in the 21st Century. Dig. Middle East Stud.  26, 1 (2017), 74 –
96. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/dome.12104  
[17] Ayman Bajnaid, Giuseppe Alessandro Veltri, Tariq Elyas, and Mahmoud Ma qableh. 2018. A 
Quantitative Survey of Online Impression Formation and Mate Preferences among Saudi Users of 
Matrimonial Websites. Mod. Appl. Sci.  12, 11 (October 2018), 121. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.5539/mas.v12n11p121  
[18] Ayman Bajnaid, Giuseppe Alessandr o Veltri, Tariq Elyas, and Ra’ed Masa’deh. 2019. Utilizing 
Matrimonial Web sites Among Saudi Users: An Empirical Study. Dig. Middle East Stud.  28, 1 (2019), 
164–193. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/dome.12158  
[19] Ayman Bajnaid, Giuseppe Alessandro Veltri, Ala ’a Hamdi Gharibeh, Ala’a Hamdi Gharibeh, and 
Mahmoud Maqableh. 2018. Qualitative Interviews of Using Matrimonial Websites among Saudi Users. 
Mod. Appl. Sci.  12, 11 (October 2018), 223. DOI:https://doi.org/10.5539/mas.v12n11p223  
[20] Shaowen Bardzell. 2010.  Feminist HCI: taking stock and outlining an agenda for design. (2010), 10.211:28 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . [21] Haifa Binsahl and Shanton Chang. 2012. International Saudi Female students in Australia and social 
networking sites: what are the motivations and barriers to communication. In  ISANA International 
Academy Association Conference , 1 –12. Retrieved September 19, 2016 from 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Haifa_Binsahl/publication/261100072_International_Saudi_Fema
le_Students_in_Australia_and_Social_Networking_Sites_What_are_the_ motivations_and_barriers_to
_communication/links/0f3175333a1d295df2000000.pdf  
[22] Jeremy Birnholtz, Irina Shklovski, Mark Handel, and Eran Toch. 2015. Let’s Talk About Sex (Apps), 
CSCW. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference Companion on Computer Suppor ted Cooperative 
Work & Social Computing  (CSCW’15 Companion), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 283 –288. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2685553.2685557  
[23] Johanna Brewer, Joseph “Jofish ” Kaye, Amanda Williams, and Susan Wyche. 2006. Sexual Interactions: 
Why We Should Talk About Sex in HCI. In CHI ’06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems  (CHI EA ’06), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1695 –1698. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1125451.1125765  
[24] John T. Cacioppo, Stephanie Cacioppo, Gian C. Gonzaga, Elizabeth L.  Ogburn, and Tyler J. 
VanderWeele. 2013. Marital satisfaction and break -ups differ across on -line and off -line meeting 
venues. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.  110, 25 (June 2013), 10135 –10140. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1222447110  
[25] Finn Christensen and Ju ergen Jung. 2010. Global Social Interactions with Sequential Binary Decisions: 
The Case of Marriage, Divorce, and Stigma. BE J. Theor. Econ.  10, 1 (October 2010). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.2202/1935 -1704.1652  
[26] Camille Cobb and Tadayoshi Kohno. 2017. How P ublic Is My Private Life? Privacy in Online Dating. In 
Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web  (WWW ’17), International World 
Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, Perth, Australia, 1231 –1240. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/30389 12.3052592  
[27] Peter C. Dodd. 1973. Family Honor and the Forces of Change in Arab Society. Int. J. Middle East Stud.  4, 
1 (1973), 40 –54. 
[28] Mohsen A F El -Hazmi, A R Al -Swailem, A S Warsy, A M Al -Swailem, R Sulaimani, and A A Al -
Meshari. Consanguinity among the Saudi Arabian population. 5.  
[29] Andrew T. Fiore and Judith S. Donath. 2004. Online Personals: An Overview. In CHI ’04 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI EA ’04), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1395 –1398. 
DOI:https://doi.org/ 10.1145/985921.986073  
[30] Arup Kumar Ghosh, Karla Badillo -Urquiola, Mary Beth Rosson, Heng Xu, John M. Carroll, and Pamela 
J. Wisniewski. 2018. A Matter of Control or Safety?: Examining Parental Use of Technical Monitoring 
Apps on Teens’ Mobile Devices. I n Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems  (CHI ’18), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 194:1 –194:14. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173768  
[31] Arup Kumar Ghosh, Karla Badillo -Urquiola, and Pamela Wisniewski. 2018. Examinin g the Effects of 
Parenting Styles on Offline and Online Adolescent Peer Problems. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM 
Conference on Supporting Groupwork  (GROUP ’18), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 150 –153. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3148330.3154519  
[32] Rosanna E. Gu adagno, Bradley M. Okdie, and Sara A. Kruse. 2012. Dating deception: Gender, online 
dating, and exaggerated self -presentation. Comput. Hum. Behav.  28, 2 (March 2012), 642 –647. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2011.11.010  
[33] Hala Guta and Magdalena Karol ak. 2015. Veiling and blogging: social media as sites of identity 
negotiation and expression among Saudi women. J. Int. Womens Stud.  16, 2 (2015), 115.  
[34] Jeffrey A. Hall. 2014. First comes social networking, then comes marriage? Characteristics of 
Ameri cans married 2005 -2012 who met through social networking sites. Cyberpsychology Behav. Soc. 
Netw.  17, 5 (May 2014), 322 –326. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2013.0408  
[35] Jeffrey T. Hancock, Catalina Toma, and Nicole Ellison. 2007. The Truth About Lying  in Online Dating 
Profiles. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI ’07), 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 449 –452. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240697Saudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:29 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . [36] Mark J. Handel and Irina Shklovski. 2012. Disclosure, Amb iguity and Risk Reduction in Real -time 
Dating Sites. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on Supporting Group Work  
(GROUP ’12), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 175 –178. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2389176.2389203  
[37] ADE HIDAYAT. THE VALUE INHE RITANCE OF FAMILY SYSTEMS IN ISLAMIC TRADITION: 8.  
[38] Jacquelyn Lauren Hoza. 2019. Is There Feminism in Saudi Arabia? UF J. Undergrad. Res.  20, 2 (February 
2019). DOI:https://doi.org/10.32473/ufjur.v20i2.106192  
[39] Samia Ibtasam, Lubna Razaq, Maryam Ayu b, Jennifer R. Webster, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, and Richard 
Anderson. 2019. “My cousin bought the phone for me. I never go to mobile shops. ”: The Role of Family 
in Women’s Technological Inclusion in Islamic Culture. Proc. ACM Hum. -Comput. Interact.  3, CSCW 
(November 2019), 46:1 –46:33. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3359148  
[40] Irving Seidman. 1998. Interviewing as Qualitative Research: A Guide for Researchers in Education And the 
Social Sciences.  Teachers College Press, New York.  
[41] Mikkel S. Jørgensen, Frede rik K. Nissen, Jeni Paay, Jesper Kjeldskov, and Mikael B. Skov. 2016. 
Monitoring Children’s Physical Activity and Sleep: A Study of Surveillance and Information 
Disclosure. In Proceedings of the 28th Australian Conference on Computer -Human Interaction  (OzC HI 
’16), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 50 –58. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3010915.3010936  
[42] Varda Konstam, Samantha Karwin, Teyana Curran, Meaghan Lyons, and Selda Celen -Demirtas. 2016. 
Stigma and Divorce: A Relevant Lens for Emerging and Young Adult Women? J. Divorce Remarriage  
57, 3 (April 2016), 173 –194. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/10502556.2016.1150149  
[43] A. A. R. Kritem, A. Abou Rakba, and I. F. Al -Aissawi. 1981. Family Saudi: Role and changes and their 
impact on decision making (Arabic text). King Abdu l Aziz Univ. Coll. Econ. Res. Cent.  (1981).  
[44] Adeline Y. Lee and Amy S. Bruckman. 2007. Judging You by the Company You Keep: Dating on Social 
Networking Sites. In Proceedings of the 2007 International ACM Conference on Supporting Group Work  
(GROUP ’07),  ACM, New York, NY, USA, 371 –378. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1316624.1316680  
[45] Xiao Ma, Nazanin Andalibi, Louise Barkhuus, and Mor Naaman. 2017. “People Are Either Too Fake or 
Too Real ”: Opportunities and Challenges in Tie -Based Anonymity. In Proceedin gs of the 2017 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI ’17), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1781 –1793. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025956  
[46] Xiao Ma, Jeff Hancock, and Mor Naaman. 2016. Anonymity, Intimacy and Self -Disclosure in Socia l 
Media. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI ’16), 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3857 –3869. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858414  
[47] Xiao Ma, Emily Sun, and Mor Naaman. 2017. What Happens in Happn: The War ranting Powers of 
Location History in Online Dating. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work and Social Computing  (CSCW ’17), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 41 –50. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998241  
[48] Christoph er M. Mascaro, Rachel M. Magee, and Sean P. Goggins. 2012. Not Just a Wink and Smile: An 
Analysis of User -defined Success in Online Dating. In Proceedings of the 2012 iConference  (iConference 
’12), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 200 –206. DOI:https://doi.org/10.11 45/2132176.2132202  
[49] Christina Masden and W. Keith Edwards. 2015. Understanding the Role of Community in Online 
Dating. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  
(CHI ’15), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 535 –544. DO I:https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702417  
[50] Laura Menin. 2020. ‘Destiny is written by God’: Islamic predestination, responsibility, and 
transcendence in Central Morocco. J. R. Anthropol. Inst.  26, 3 (2020), 515 –532. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/1467 -9655.13312  
[51] Michael Muller, Judith S. Olson, and Wendy A. Kellogg. 2014. Curiosity, Creativity, and Surprise as 
Analytic Tools: Grounded Theory Method. In Ways of Knowing in HCI . Springer New York, 25 –48. 
[52] Diego Muñoz, Bernd Ploderer, and Margot Breret on. 2018. Towards Design for Renegotiating the 
Parent -adult Child Relationship After Children Leave Home. In Proceedings of the 30th Australian 
Conference on Computer -Human Interaction  (OzCHI ’18), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 303 –313. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.11 45/3292147.3292149  
[53] Diego Muñoz, Bernd Ploderer, and Margot Brereton. 2019. Position Exchange Workshops: A Method 
to Design for Each Other in Families. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in211:30 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . Computing Systems  (CHI ’19), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 109:1 –109:14. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300339  
[54] Maryam Mustafa, Shaimaa Lazem, Ebtisam Alabdulqader, Kentaro Toyama, Sharifa Sultana, Samia 
Ibtasam, Richard Anderson, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. IslamicHCI: Designing with and within 
Muslim Populations. In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems , ACM, Honolulu HI USA, 1 –8. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3375151  
[55] Soud Nassir, Adel Al -Dawood, Elham Alghamdi, and Eman Alyami.  2019. “My Guardian Did Not 
Approve! ”: Stories from Fieldwork in Saudi Arabia. Interactions  26, 3 (April 2019), 44 –49. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3318145  
[56] R. Nayak, M. Zhang, and L. Chen. 2010. A Social Matching System for an Online Dating Network: A 
Preliminary Study. In 2010 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops , 352 –357. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDMW.2010.36  
[57] Borke Obada -Obieh and  Anil Somayaji. 2017. Can I Believe You?: Establishing Trust in Computer 
Mediated Introductions. In Proceedings of the 2017 New Security Paradigms Workshop  (NSPW 2017), 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 94 –106. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3171533.3171544  
[58] Josue Ortega and Philipp Hergovich. 2017. The Strength of Absent Ties: Social Integration via Online 
Dating. SSRN Electron. J.  (2017). DOI:https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3044766  
[59] Anthony T. Pinter, Pamela J. Wisniewski, Heng Xu, Mary Beth Rosson, and Jack M. C aroll. 2017. 
Adolescent Online Safety: Moving Beyond Formative Evaluations to Designing Solutions for the 
Future. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children  (IDC ’17), ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 352 –357. DOI:https://doi.org/10.11 45/3078072.3079722  
[60] John R. Porter, Kiley Sobel, Sarah E. Fox, Cynthia L. Bennett, and Julie A. Kientz. 2017. Filtered Out: 
Disability Disclosure Practices in Online Dating Communities. Proc ACM Hum -Comput Interact  1, 
CSCW (December 2017), 87:1 –87:13. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3134722  
[61] POV. 2013. Infographic: A History of Love & Technology | xoxosms | POV | PBS. POV | American 
Documentary Inc.  Retrieved September 16, 2019 from http://archive.pov.org/xoxosms/infographic -
technology -dating  
[62] Menna tallah Saleh, Mohamed Khamis, and Christian Sturm. 2019. What About My Privacy, Habibi?: 
Understanding Privacy Concerns and Perceptions of Users from Different Socioeconomic Groups in 
the Arab World. In Human -Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2019  (Lecture N otes in Computer 
Science), Springer International Publishing, 67 –87. 
[63] Nithya Sambasivan, Amna Batool, Nova Ahmed, Tara Matthews, Kurt Thomas, Laura Sanely Gaytán -
Lugo, David Nemer, Elie Bursztein, Elizabeth Churchill, and Sunny Consolvo. 2019. “They Do n’t Leave 
Us Alone Anywhere We Go ”: Gender and Digital Abuse in South Asia. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI ’19), Association for Computing Machinery, 
Glasgow, Scotland Uk, 1 –14. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1 145/3290605.3300232  
[64] Diane J. Schiano, Christine Burg, Anthony Nalan Smith, and Florencia Moore. 2016. Parenting Digital 
Youth: How Now? In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems  (CHI EA ’16), AC M, New York, NY, USA, 3181 –3189. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2892481  
[65] Vishal Sharma, Bonnie Nardi, Juliet Norton, and A. M. Tsaasan. 2019. Towards Safe Spaces Online: A 
Study of Indian Matrimonial Websites. In Human -Computer Interaction – INTER ACT 2019  (Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science), Springer International Publishing, Cham, 43 –66. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030-29387 -1_4 
[66] Ramina Sotoudeh, Roger Friedland, and Janet Afary. 2017. Digital romance: the sources of online love 
in the M uslim world. Media Cult. Soc.  39, 3 (April 2017), 429 –439. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/0163443717691226  
[67] C. L. Toma, J. T. Hancock, and N. B. Ellison. 2008. Separating Fact From Fiction: An Examination of 
Deceptive Self -Presentation in Online Dating Pr ofiles. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull.  34, 8 (May 2008), 1023 –
1036. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167208318067  
[68] Ralph Vacca. 2019. Brokering Data: Co -Designing Technology with Latina Teens to Support 
Communication with Parents: Leveraging Cultural Practic es of Latinx Youth Through Co -Design. InSaudi Arabian Parents'  Perceptions of Online Marital Matchmaking Technologies   211:31 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children  (IDC ’19), 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 197 –207. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3311927.3323142  
[69] As Warsy, Mh Al -Jaser, A Albdass, S Al-Daihan, and M Alanazi. 2014. Is consanguinity prevalence 
decreasing in Saudis?: A study in two generations. Afr. Health Sci.  14, 2 (June 2014), 314. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.4314/ahs.v14i2.5  
[70] Pamela Wisniewski, Arup Kumar Ghosh, Heng Xu, Mary Beth R osson, and John M. Carroll. 2017. 
Parental Control vs. Teen Self -Regulation: Is There a Middle Ground for Mobile Online Safety? In 
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing  
(CSCW ’17), ACM, New York,  NY, USA, 51 –69. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998352  
[71] Pamela J. Wisniewski, Heng Xu, Mary Beth Rosson, and John M. Carroll. 2014. Adolescent Online 
Safety: The “Moral ” of the Story. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supporte d 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing  (CSCW ’14), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1258 –1271. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531696  
[72] Pamela Wisniewski, Haiyan Jia, Na Wang, Saijing Zheng, Heng Xu, Mary Beth Rosson, and John M. 
Carroll. 2015. Resilience Mi tigates the Negative Effects of Adolescent Internet Addiction and Online 
Risk Exposure. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems  (CHI ’15), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4029 –4038. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123 .2702240  
[73] Pamela Wisniewski, Heng Xu, Mary Beth Rosson, and John M. Carroll. 2017. Parents Just Don’T 
Understand: Why Teens Don’T Talk to Parents About Their Online Risk Experiences. In Proceedings of 
the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Coope rative Work and Social Computing  (CSCW ’17), 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 523 –540. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998236  
[74] Doug Zytko, Sukeshini Grandhi, and Quentin (Gad) Jones. 2016. The Coaches Said...What?: Analysis of 
Online Dating Strategies Reco mmended by Dating Coaches. In Proceedings of the 19th International 
Conference on Supporting Group Work  (GROUP ’16), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 385 –397. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2957276.2957287  
[75] Doug Zytko, Jessa Lingel, Jeremy Birnholtz, Nicole B. Ell ison, and Jeff Hancock. 2015. Online Dating 
As Pandora’s Box: Methodological Issues for the CSCW Community. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM 
Conference Companion on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing  (CSCW’15 
Companion), ACM, New York, NY , USA, 131 –134. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2685553.2699335  
[76] Douglas Zytko. 2016. Enhancing Evaluation of Potential Romantic Partners Online. In Proceedings of 
the 19th International Conference on Supporting Group Work  (GROUP ’16), ACM, New York, NY, U SA, 
517–520. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2957276.2997030  
[77] Douglas Zytko, Sukeshini A. Grandhi, and Quentin Jones. 2016. Online Dating Coaches’ User 
Evaluation Strategies. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems  (CHI EA ’16), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1337 –1343. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2892482  
[78] Douglas Zytko, Victor Regalado, Sukeshini A. Grandhi, and Quentin Jones. 2018. Supporting Online 
Dating Decisions with a Prompted Discussion  Interface. In Companion of the 2018 ACM Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing  (CSCW ’18), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
353–356. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3272973.3274095  
[79] 2019. Saudi Arabia ends gender segregation in rest aurants. BBC News . Retrieved September 9, 2020 
from https://www.bbc.com/news/world -middle -east-50708384  
[80] Historic day as Saudi women get behind the wheel to drive | Al Arabiya English. Retrieved September 
9, 2020 from https://english.alarabiya.net/en/N ews/gulf/2018/06/24/ -SaudiWomenDriving -officially -
comes -into-effect -across -the-kingdom  
[81] Revamped guardianship laws usher in a new era for Saudi women | Al Arabiya English. Retrieved 
September 9, 2020 from https://english.alarabiya.net/en/features/2019/ 08/03/Revamped -guardianship -
laws-usher -in-a-new-era-for-Saudi -women  
[82] Saudi Arabia: social network penetration 2017 | Statistic. Statista . Retrieved March 1, 2018 from 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/284451/saudi -arabia -social -network -penetration/211:32 Adel Al -Dawood et al.   
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 211, Publication date: December 2020 . [83] If any of the signs of puberty appear in a boy, he becomes accountable - Islam Question & Answer. 
Retrieved December 8, 2019 from https://islamqa.info/en/answers/197392/if -any-of-the-signs -of-
puberty -appear -in-a-boy-he-becomes -accountable  
[84] Is the h usband obliged to spend on his wife if she is working? Does he have the right to take anything 
of her salary? - Islam Question & Answer. Retrieved September 2, 2020 from 
https://islamqa.info/en/answers/126316/is -the-husband -obliged -to-spend -on-his-wife-if-she-is-
working -does-he-have -the-right -to-take-anything -of-her-salary  
[85] ID and verification | Airbnb Help Center. Airbnb . Retrieved May 29, 2020 from 
https://www.airbnb.com/help/topic/1389/id -and-verification  
[86] Civil Affairs. Retrieved May 29, 2020 from 
https://www.moi.gov.sa/wps/portal/Home/sectors/civilaffairs/contents/!ut/p/z1/jZHNUoMwFEZfhQ1L
yS2goLsMMwK1jqJDxWwYKCnEgaRNg9i3N8VudCxtVrnJ -
fJzLiIoQ4QXn6wuFBO8aHX9Tm5yiF03mrn2g -8-
3wNO7HmAg9gOHz30NgJBiCPXWwD4i_AaYhylL7eJ4wB2ELkkDycGhgvzpwEyffxrIdH83CXaA vvYb
glGZCW4ol8KZZ1gRsWGgptwmDaio8a4yZUJh8oESeu -
HU2OTM6PVg1W5RVdF32rcsr1F8jkA7D7FwDsawA7yyjyEvvJnx2BqTacE6El1K0of3qOeen4NSKSrqm
k0uqlXm6U2uzuTDBhGAarFqJuqbUSnQn_RRqx05Z -
k2jTpWk27B1g8RUp98M3msHkSg!!/dz/d5/L0lHSkovd0RNQUprQUVnQSEhLzROVkUvZW4!/  
[87] CITC E -Services. Retrieved May 29, 2020 from https://portalservices.citc.gov.sa/E -
Services/MyNumbers/MyNumbersInquiry.aspx  
 
 Received June 2020; accepted July 2020.