Video Search: Are Algorithms All We Need? 
Jeff Ubois 
Archival.tv 
Berkeley, CA 94708 
jeff@ubois.comJamie Davidson 
YouTube 
San Bruno, CA 94066 
Davidson@google.com 
 Marko Grabolnik 
Jožef Stefan Institute 
Ljubljana, Slovenia  
Marko.Grobelnik@ijs.si 
Paul Over 
NIST  
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Over@nist.gov 
 Hans Westerhof 
Beeld en Geluid 
Hilversum, The Netherlands 
hwesterhof@beeldengeluid.nl 
ABSTRACT  
This panel will debate various approaches to improving video 
search, and explore how professional cataloguing, crowd sourced 
metadata, and improvements in search algorithms will evolve over the next ten years. Panelists will explore the needs of large scale video archives, and compare these against the current capabilities of video search. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors  
H.3 INFORMATION STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL 
H.3.7 Digital Libraries 
General Terms  
Algorithms, Design, Experimentation. 
Keywords  
Video, search, algorithms, design, archives 
1. INTRODUCTION 
During the 1990s, search technology improved sufficiently to 
handle large volumes of textual material without the need for manual abstracting, indexing, a nd cataloging. Taking professional 
cataloguers out of the process of text indexing created enormous value; an analogous set of advances  is underway with video in the 
2010s. But will it be possible to take professionals out of the process of cataloging video ma nually? How might different 
approaches to video search to evolve, and which ones will prove most useful? What kind of societal value can we reap by making all of our broadcast history as readily accessible as books, journal 
articles, and newspapers are now? How can the W3C help with the development of appropriate standards for video description 
and search? Answers to and debate  about these questions will be 
the focus of this panel, which has representatives from some of the largest, most viewed, and car efully indexed collections of 
digital video available online.  
  Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).  
WWW 2010, April 26–30, 2010, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA. 
ACM  978-1-60558-799-8/10/04.  2. PARTICIPANT BIOGRAPHIES 
Jamie Davidson  is Product Manager, on Search and Algorithmic 
Discovery, YouTube.  Video di scovery at YouTube includes 
relevance based search ranking, for which Google is well known, 
as well large scale video recommendation engines.  Prior to 
YouTube, Jamie worked as an engineer on the Ads Quality team for Google's search ad system for  auctions, ranking and pricing. 
Marko Grobelnik  is Technical Associate in the Department 
of Knowledge Technologies, Jožef Stefan Institute in Ljubljana, 
Slovenia, and Program Manager for VideoLectures.net, which 
provides free and open access of a high quality video lectures presented by distinguished scholar s and scientists at the most 
important and prominent events like conferences, summer schools, workshops and science promotional events from many 
fields of Science, and operate s within the FP5, FP6, and FP7 
European Framework Programs.  
Paul Over  is a computer scientist at the US National 
Institute of Standards and Tec hnology and founding project leader 
for the TREC Video Retrieval Evaluations (TRECVID) - an 
international effort since 2001 to  promote open, metrics-based 
research in video retrieval and analysis systems, both interactive (human-in-the-loop) and fully automatic. Paul has also been responsible at NIST for evaluation of interactive text retrieval systems within the TExt REtrieval Evaluations (TREC). Before joining NIST he applied his inte rests in linguistics and computer 
science in advanced software product development for IBM. 
Jeff Ubois  is a consultant on digital preservation to the 
Beeld en Geluid, and to Fujitsu La bs of America. Prior to this, 
Jeff was part of the Preserving Dig ital Public Television Project at 
Thirteen/WNET, and a staff resear ch associate at the iSchool at 
UC Berkeley. For the Internet Archive, Jeff has developed policies to manage images of war, and limit the collection and retention of digital library usage data.  
Hans Westerhof  is program director Images for the Future 
at the Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision (Beeld en Geluid), which looks after, and releases, 70 per cent of the Dutch audio-visual heritage. In tota l, Sound and Vision takes care of 
700,000 hours of television, radio,  music and film, making it a 
supreme collection full of nationa l and international memorable 
events. In the project Images for the Future, Sound and Vision 
will digitise 280.000 hours of material. 
 
WWW 2010 • Panel
April 26-30 • Raleigh • NC • USA
1339