Fluid Sex Robots: Looking to the 2LGBTQIA+ 
Community to Shape the Future of Sex Robots 
Skyla Y. Dudek 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Manitoba  
Winnipeg, Canada 
dudeks@myumanitoba.ca 
 James E. Young 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Manitoba 
Winnipeg, Canada 
young@cs.umanitoba.ca
Abstract— As sex robots continue to be developed by industry, 
portrayed by media, and studied by researchers, it is common to 
conceptualize robots from a cisgender and heterosexual (cishet), 
or feminist perspective. We advocate for an increased shift toward 
the 2LGBTQIA+ community for inspiration and a path forward 
for more inclusive, successful, and socially responsible sex robots. 
In addition to the intrinsic value of being inclusive, looking to the 
2LGBTQIA+ community can help us to break away from 
traditional ideas of gender and sexuality, to unlock the full 
potential of this technology to be flexible and offer new 
possibilities. Further, we reflect on the importance of considering 
how the designs of sex robots, as politically charged technological 
artifacts, can contribute to reinforcing ideas about 
heteronormativity; instead, sex robots have the potential to 
positively contribute to breaking down traditional barriers 
surrounding gender and sex. We envision a future of sex robots 
that reach their full potential as fluid, individualized companions 
that enable people to comfortably engage their interests and 
identity. 
Keywords—sex robots, companion robots, human-robot 
interaction, 2LGBTQIA+ 
I. I NTRODUCTION  
 V i r t u a l  a n d  p h y s i c a l  c o m p a n i o n  r o b o t s  c o n t i n u e  t o  b e  
researched and developed to support people’s personal needs, 
including general wellness and loneliness [1], [2], social 
connection1, and sexual needs2. These needs are intertwined, and 
companion robots can be expected to serve multiple needs 
simultaneously – this idea has been well explored in the 
community (e.g., in the book “Love and Sex with Robots” [3]). 
It is not sufficient to consider sex robots simply as collections of 
body parts (e.g., face, body, a penis, vagina, etc.), but instead as 
socially embedded technologies that relate to ideas around 
gender, sexuality, and what is or is not appropriate. Thus, while 
robots continue to be sold as sex robots, we can expect them to 
serve other companionship needs as well. As novel 
technologies, it is not yet clear how people will ascribe gender 
and sexuality to sex robots, for example, whether it even makes 
sense to say a robot is male or female. Instead, we should aim to 
deconstruct sex robots more holistically, accepting that they may 
be pangender and pansexual, simultaneously anywhere on the 
gender and sexual and romantic orientation spectrums. 
                                                           
1 Gatebox, commercial product.  https://www.gatebox.ai/en/. Accessed 2021. 
2 RealDoll, commercial product. https://www.realdoll.com/. Accessed 2021.   T h e  2 L G B T Q I A +  c o m m u n i t y  r e c o g n i z e s  t h a t  g e n d e r  a n d  
sexuality are more complex, more fluid, and more dynamic than 
limited traditional ideas of the binary male and female. As such, 
we posit that the human-robot interaction community can and 
should learn from the 2LGBTQIA+ community on how to 
conceptualize and develop sex robots. In the remainder of this 
paper, we present an exploration of ideas connecting the 
2LGBTQIA+ community with sex robots, highlighting the 
unique experience of the community in relation to technology 
(and thus what this may mean for gender in robots), and how sex 
robots can influence social ideas and behaviours about sex and 
gender. 
It is important to address terminology: we have elected to 
use 2LGBTQIA+ as an inclusive acronym to refer to the non-
cishet (cisgender heterosexual) community. We recognize the 
challenge of selecting a label given the long and complicated 
history of language used to describe the community, which is 
still evolving in the present day. Despite the existence of 
resources that discuss language use (e.g.,[4]), there is yet no 
universally agreed upon standard. There are other common 
variants of the acronym we use (e.g., LGBT, etc.), as well as less 
common terms such as SAGA (Sexuality and Gender 
Alliance/Acceptance/Acknowledgement) and GSRM (Gender, 
Sexual, and Romantic Minorities). Each of these terms have 
their own nuances and set of pros and cons. We selected 
2LGBTQIA+ as a broadly inclusive and frequently used 
convention that explicitly includes many identities. However, 
we acknowledge in using the plus sign that there exist additional 
identities not explicitly included (e.g., pansexual), as well as 
additional culturally rooted vocabulary (e.g., Hijra). Further, 
there are people who do not use a specific label but still identify 
as part of the community.  
Although the field of Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) has 
engaged the study of sex robots and companion robots in 
general, we advocate for the continued and increased inclusion 
of the points of view from groups that have been historically 
overlooked or excluded, including the Two-Spirit, Lesbian, 
Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer/Questioning, Intersex, 
Asexual/Agender/Aromantic (2LGBTQIA+) community.  
 
 Late-Breaking Report HRI 2022, March 7-10, 2022, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan
746 978-1-6654-0731-1/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEEII. L OOKING TO THE 2LGBTQIA+  COMMUNITY  
 W h i l e  t h e r e  i s  c l e a r  i n t r i n s i c  v a l u e  i n  b e i n g  i n c l u s i v e  o f  
minorities, there is increasing evidence that the 2LGBTQIA+ 
community is much larger than once thought, with more people 
identifying with the community as acceptance grows. For 
example, Generation Z (people born from 1997-2012) has been 
dubbed the “Gayest Generation.” A 2020 poll [5] found that 
about 1 in 6 American Gen. Z adults identified as something 
other than cishet. This percentage decreases with each older 
generation, with only 2% or fewer of Americans born before 
1965 reported belonging to this group. Similarly, only 66% [6] 
of Britain Gen. Z report that they are only exclusively 
heterosexual. Thus, increased inclusion of the 2LGBTQIA+ 
community is required for avoiding narrow perspectives that 
limit our understanding of how a growing segment of people 
may adopt and engage with love and sex robots. 
A Diversity of Experience with Technology 
The 2LGBTQIA+ community has, by definition, experience 
with breaking traditional cishet boundaries and constraints, and 
thus are more open to diverse ideas surrounding sex, gender, and 
relationships. While this does not imply agreement within the 
group or necessarily more liberal sexuality, it can be said that 
the community in general is more used to being presented with 
and discussing new ideas of sex, gender, and relationships based 
on their history, in comparison to more traditional cishet people. 
For example, specifically for sex, non-cishet people have 
reported to be more likely to engage in partnered sexual 
activities such as oral and anal sex than cishet individuals [7]. 
Thus, we can reasonably expect a more diverse engagement by 
the 2LGBTQIA+ community with their use of sex robots. 
By extension, research has illustrated how the 2LGBTQIA+ 
community has engaged with technology differently than cishet 
people. For example, in one study [7] sex toy users were more 
likely to report as non cishet, indicating that the 2LGBTQIA+ 
community may further be more experienced with integrating 
technology into their sex lives. Similarly, the LGBTQ+3 
community is more likely to experiment with gender and 
sexuality in video games [8] by doing things such as playing a 
chosen avatar or character whose gender is different to their 
gender identity or expression outside the game. The motivations 
for this vary, with reasons being given to include wanting to 
perform romantic mechanics of the game with another gender, 
wanting to use the different clothing options available for their 
in-game gender, and just for fun. This kind of behaviour has 
been documented in people of all identities.  
The drive to adopt a different gender identity or expression 
in video games may be because the options available in most 
games are often too restricting to match the person’s sense of 
identity [9]. For example, in games that allow players to marry 
(such as in the Harvest Moon franchise), it is uncommon to 
allow the player’s character to romance or “marry” someone of 
the same gender. Moreover, many popular games often present 
the player with the choice to choose one of two binary genders. 
For instance, in most Pokémon titles the game asks the player at 
the start of the game “Are you a boy or a girl?” However, there 
                                                           
3 Note that to preserve the accuracy of the data used from other sources, we                            
used their choice of terminology when making reference.  has been a recent surge in video games to be more inclusive. The 
farming simulator Stardew Valley allows players to “marry” any 
gender among the characters including the option to platonically 
“marry” the non-binary character Krobus. The Sims, a life 
simulation game, has updated in their fourth title the ability to 
customize a character’s sex and gender further with options to 
questions like “Can this [person] use the toilet standing?” and 
“This [person] will be able to: Become pregnant, Get others 
pregnant, Neither.” The takeaway from all this, is that, when 
designing technology, we cannot expect people to interact with 
things in the ways that we designed and intended. Even when 
video games specifically code restrictions based on gender into 
their platform, people will still find a way around it to achieve a 
desired goal, just like how historically people have gone against 
the rules and boundaries surrounding notions of gender. 
Additionally, it has been found that LGBT+ people have a 
greater online presence exploring their identity. One survey 
found that 1 in 5 people “come out” online, and that for Gen Z, 
that number rose to 75% [10]. An additional survey [11] of 
LGBT youth also found that 14% of people first disclosed their 
identity to someone online and 29% said they were out more 
online than in person. Moreover, LGBT youth were five times 
as likely as non-LGBT youth to have searched for information 
online on sexuality or sexual attraction (62% vs. 12%). LGBT 
youth were also more likely to have searched for health and 
medical information compared to non-LGBT youth (81% vs. 
46%). 
Thus, considering all these factors, the unique experience of 
the community may lead to an additional perspective and rate of 
acceptance to sex robots in their own lives or to other members 
of society. Sherry Turkle presents the theory that increased 
exposure to technology leads to more familiarity and bonding 
with technology [12]. As demonstrated, the community has a 
plethora of experience in this area from  their experimentation 
with gender in video games, use of sex toys, and curated online 
presence. As such, this may lead to the community having a 
wider tolerance and acceptance of sex robots and additionally 
engaging with this technology in a more dynamic and flexible 
way. Similarly, since the community  has a historically non-
traditional approach to sex, they may have an easier time 
exploring a positive narrative when it comes to sex robots. 
III. S TEREOTYPES IN ROBOT DESIGN  
The social robot design sphere often leverages human 
stereotypes in the robot design, for example, through the shape 
and colour of the robot body, the robot’s voice and mannerisms, 
or the dialogue that is chosen and made available. There is a 
growing effort within the robotics community to investigate 
whether people discriminate against and respond to robots based 
on gender, ethnicity, and racial stereotypes as well as how to 
mitigate such responses [13], [14], [15]. Further, we may expect 
that the context of use (e.g., service industry) may promote 
certain gendered perceptions [16]. 
While we can expect people to naturally ascribe gender to 
robots [16] (even those not designed to elicit the response), there Late-Breaking Report HRI 2022, March 7-10, 2022, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan
747is not as much about sexuality and heteronormativity that has yet 
been explored. Consider the example of the Disney movie 
WALL-E, where the fictional characters WALL-E and EVE are 
two robots that are portrayed as having a romance. Despite using 
subtle cues, WALL-E is clearly the ‘male’ and EVE is the 
‘female’ in this dynamic [17], a clear binary traditional result 
that audiences readily adopt. It is important to reflect on the 
artistic design decisions here, where even though the characters 
were robots and not people (different robot models, too!), they 
were designed with clear binary genders in a male-female 
romance. This is an example where technology design decisions 
can reinforce heteronormativity. 
Thus, even though many mainstream social robots are 
designed as animals or related abstractions (e.g., Sony AIBO, or 
the Paro therapy robot), which appears to leave less room for 
sexualization, we can still expect people to readily assign them 
a romantic and/or sexual orientation. Further, we posit that the 
community should engage with this discussion to better 
understand how sex and gender relate to their designs. More 
directly, as sex robots continue to become more mainstream and 
their designs iterated upon, it raises many questions about how 
robot gender and sexuality will be  programmed and designed, if 
at all, and how humans will react to that aspect of humanoid 
robots based on their  experience and knowledge of human 
stereotypes. 
IV. R OBOTS AS MORE THAN ARTIFACTS  
As sex robots continue to develop, we must ask ourselves if 
their design will reaffirm heteronormative discourses and gender 
and sexuality stereotypes. Science and Technology Studies or 
Socio-Technical Studies (STS) affirms that technology is not 
merely material objects and artifacts. While that is a component, 
social practices, social relationships and social institutions are 
required to design, produce, distribute, and use this 
technology [18]. It is a mistake to assume that technology is 
neutral. Technology is in fact infused with values, whether 
intentional or not, and becomes functional in social systems 
through the social meaning and practices surrounding it. Thus, 
adoption of a particular technology means an adoption of a 
particular social order or values. It has been well documented 
over the years that artifacts of technology can enforce social 
biases and agendas [19], [20]. Therefore, whether we would like 
them to or not, robots, like other technological artifacts, will 
influence our social systems. This applies especially to sex 
robots because of their ability to form social relationships and 
be deployed within  existing social systems [21]. 
Sherry Turkle in “The Second Self” [12] says that we should 
not be asking the question of what robots will look like in the 
future, but what will we be like? What kind of people are we 
becoming? But perhaps a better question to ask would be what 
will we want robots to be like in the future? Just like technology 
influences society, society can also influence technology. If we 
want to achieve technology infused with certain values, such as 
sex robots that promote healthy engagement with one’s 
sexuality, we must be at the forefront of discussions, guideline 
creation, and design to offer our feedback and ensure sex robots 
are designed and employed with an inclusive perspective.  V. T HE FLUIDITY OF ROBOTS  
On their own, sex robots raise many practical and 
philosophical questions about sexuality and gender. A sex robot 
can be implemented with features such as detachable and 
changeable genital parts, different choices of clothing, a 
changing pitched voice, and different dialogue and physical 
social interactions and behaviours. If a sex robot can change 
virtually in an instant traditional markers of gender that humans 
use, are all robots thus genderfluid, pangender, or perhaps 
agender? As it is inherently ingrained within us due to our 
current culture and environment, depending on where a robot’s 
traditional gender markers lie, we will classify and perceive 
robots as either ‘male’ or ‘female’ or perhaps non-binary. But 
where is it that we as humans draw the line between where a 
robot lies on the gender spectrum? This answer will likely be 
different for every person, but what’s important is that the 
appearance and social interaction of robots will surely blur the 
lines of gender further in human society and cause some people 
to take a moment of introspection on the matter. 
Furthermore, with robots’ ability to change programs and 
many design aspects as needed, it also applies new questions to 
the logic of homophobia and transphobia. For instance, if a robot 
uses a deep voice, has a traditionally male name and male 
clothing, and has a penis attached and then ‘reboots’ itself to 
have a higher pitched voice, answer to a traditionally female 
name, changes its clothes to be more traditionally feminine, and 
detaches its penis for a vagina would the robot now be perceived 
or accepted as female? Would people who possess transphobia 
be more willing whether subconsciously or not to use different 
pronouns for a robot than for a transgender person? As an 
additional example, what if a son invites his mother over for 
dinner and presents his ‘male’ robot partner to her. Would she 
be more put off by the fact that her son is in a relationship with 
a robot or in a relationship with another ‘male’? Would she be 
less likely to be homophobic since this is a robot and they ‘don’t 
have a gender’? The advent of sex and companion robots creates 
a new realm of possibility for studying sociological and 
psychological elements of gender and sexuality.  
While more study is required, we believe that sex robots can 
be used as a social force for good, and they provide an 
opportunity for the community to positively shape humanity’s 
culture and ideas surrounding sexuality and gender. For 
example, picture a (plausible) world where every social 
humanoid robot is designed and mass produced using a cookie 
cutter model. A designer determines a safe, typical male (or 
female) presentation, which gets deployed to millions of homes. 
This robot’s design, and how it acts and engages in sex acts, now 
reaffirms the designer’s possibly heteronormative stance. 
Alternatively, imagine instead that this robot was designed to 
span gendered representations, for example, wearing a pink skirt 
and bow, having a voice deep in pitch, and introducing themself 
as Henry. Such a robot with non-traditional gender design, being 
widely distributed, has the potential to work toward normalizing 
non-binary gender representation instead of entrenching 
heteronormativity. If people become more used to non-
traditional roles of gender or have a moment of introspection by 
seeing how gender is presented in robots, these ideas and Late-Breaking Report HRI 2022, March 7-10, 2022, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan
748normalization may translate over to our social ideas and 
relationships with humans as well. 
VI. E XPLORING IDENTITY WITH ROBOTS  
A range of diverse sex robots can present a new way to safely 
experiment with one’s sexuality. Much like people have 
experimented in video games and in online communities [8], [9], 
[12], sex robots offer a new technological path to explore the 
boundaries of sexual identity for themselves. Moreover, by their 
nature, sex robots offer a certain set of boundaries to aid in such 
exploration that were not possible before their invention. Sex 
robots lay somewhere in the middle of exploring identity in 
virtual worlds and exploring identity by engaging physically 
with other people. Having sex with a robot can be done in the 
privacy of one’s own home, thus preserving the anonymity 
people can curate in virtual environments. But unlike virtual 
platforms, a robot can provide a stronger sense of exploration 
since the many physical aspects of sexual and romantic touch 
can be performed. However, unlike a human person, a robot can 
be programmed to not have and express its emotions as being 
hurt if the person wants to discontinue their actions in the short 
or long-term. This would likely make it feel easier and safer for 
a person to engage with a robot in the first place as well as 
express their discomfort if it comes up to avoid further negative 
emotions. Finally, the ability to customize and fluidly change 
many aspects of a sex robot’s design would allow someone the 
opportunity to immediately engage in sexual activity with what 
kind of person they found attractive and comfortable with. For 
example, picture a scenario where a man who is currently 
questioning his sexual orientation wants to try engaging in 
sexual activity with another man but is uncomfortable with the 
idea of anal sex, the position of intercourse traditionally 
associated between two men. He could instead theoretically, 
choose a robot with a traditionally masculine name, gender 
expression, and body type but who had a vagina for their sex 
organ. This would then allow the man to explore his sexual 
orientation within the boundaries that he is currently 
comfortable with.  
VII. C ONCLUSION  
 I n  t h i s  p a p e r  w e  e x p l o r e d  t h e  p o s s i b l e  p e r s p e c t i v e s  o f  t h e  
2LGBTQIA+ community on ideas of gender and sexuality 
under the guise of sex robots. We reiterate that a wider more 
inclusive and socially responsible approach to sex robots 
continue to be advocated for and researched. This is particularly 
important when taking into consideration that sex robots present 
such a strong potential for social change. Instead of reinforcing 
heteronormativity and other harmful human stereotypes 
regarding gender, the fluidity of robots should be used as an 
opportunity to question and shed new light on ideas of sex and 
gender. This especially includes the ability to perform romantic 
and sexual social interactions with sex robots to explore one’s 
own identity.  
REFERENCES  
 
[1] M. Birks, M. Bodak, J. Barlas, J. Harwood, and M. Pether, “Robotic 
Seals as Therapeutic Tools in an Aged Care Facility: A Qualitative Study,” Journal of Aging Research, vol. 2016, 2016, doi: 
10.1155/2016/8569602. 
[2] A. L. González and J. E. Young, “Please Tell Me About It,” Nov. 
2020. doi: 10.1145/3406499.3418764. 
[3] D. Levy, Love + Sex with Robots, 1st ed. New York: Harper 
Perennial, 2008. 
[4] “GLAAD Media Reference Guide - Lesbian / Gay / Bisexual 
Glossary Of Terms,” GLAAD, 2021. 
https://www.glaad.org/reference/lgbtq (accessed Nov. 24, 2021). 
[5] J. M. Jones, “LGBT Identification Rises to 5.6% in Latest U.S. 
Estimate,” GALLUP, Feb. 24, 2021. Accessed: Oct. 26, 2021. 
[Online]. Available: https://news.gallup.com/poll/329708/lgbt-
identification-rises-latest-estimate.aspx 
[6] H. Whyte-Smith, “The Kids are Alright - Understanding Gen Z,” The 
Ipsos MORI Almanac, pp. 97–100, 2017. 
[7] J. Wood, S. Crann, S. Cunningham, D. Money, and K. O’Doherty, 
“A cross-sectional survey of sex toy use, characteristics of sex toy 
use hygiene behaviours, and vulvovaginal health outcomes in 
Canada,” The Canadian Journal of Human Sexuality, vol. 26, no. 3, 
Dec. 2017, doi: 10.3138/cjhs.2017-0016. 
[8] G. Freeman, J. Bardzell, S. Bardzell, and S. C. Herring, “Simulating 
Marriage,” Feb. 2015. doi: 10.1145/2675133.2675192. 
[9] B. M. Blodgett, H. Xu, and E. M. Trauth, “Lesbian, gay, bisexual and 
transgender (LGBT) issues in virtual worlds,” ACM SIGMIS 
Database: the DATABASE for Advances in Information Systems, 
vol. 38, no. 4, Oct. 2007, doi: 10.1145/1314234.1314252. 
[10] P. Leskin, “1 in 5 LGBTQ+ people come out on the internet first, 
study finds,” Business Insider, Jun. 01, 2019. Accessed: Nov. 01, 
2021. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.businessinsider.com/coming-out-online-lgbtq-online-
facebook-youtube-tinder-2019-5 
[11] “Out Online: The Experiences of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and 
Transgender Youth,” New York, Jul. 2013. Accessed: Nov. 01, 2021. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.glsen.org/news/out-online-
experiences-lgbt-youth-internet 
[12] S. Turkle, The Second Self. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1984. 
[13] J. K. Barfield, “Discrimination and Stereotypical Responses to 
Robots as a Function of Robot Colorization,” Jun. 2021. doi: 
10.1145/3450614.3463411. 
[14] N. Friedman, K. Love, R. LC, J. E. Sabin, G. Hoffman, and W. Ju, 
“What Robots Need From Clothing,” Jun. 2021. doi: 
10.1145/3461778.3462045. 
[15] C. González-González, R. M. Gil-Iranzo, and P. Paderewsky, “Sex 
with robots,” Jun. 2019. doi: 10.1145/3335595.3335609. 
[16] Y. Wang and J. E. Young, “Beyond ‘Pink’ and ‘Blue’: Gendered 
Attitudes Towards Robots in Society,” in Proceedings of Gender and 
IT Appropriation. Science and Practice on Dialogue - Forum for 
Interdisciplinary Exchange, 2014, pp. 49:49–49:59. [Online]. 
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2670296.2670308 
[17] B. Long, “Creating Gender in Disney/Pixar ’s WALL-E,” 2011. 
[18] D. G. Johnson, “Democracy, Technology, and Information 
Societies,” in The Information Society: Innovation, Legitimacy, 
Ethics and Democracy In honor of Professor Jacques Berleur s.j., 
2007, pp. 5–16. 
[19] A. F. Martin, “Racialized Black Dolls: Compilations from Catalogs 
and Advertisements,” Journal of African Diaspora Archaeology and 
Heritage, 2014. 
[20] S. Woolgar and G. Cooper, “Do Artefacts Have Ambivalence,” 
Social Studies of Science, vol. 29, no. 3, Jun. 1999, doi: 
10.1177/030631299029003005. 
[21] J. E. Young, R. Hawkins, E. Sharlin, and T. Igarashi, “Toward 
Acceptable Domestic Robots: Applying Insights from Social 
Psychology,” International Journal of Social Robotics, vol. 1, no. 1, 
pp. 95–108, Jan. 2009, doi: 10.1007/s12369-008-0006-y. 
 
 Late-Breaking Report HRI 2022, March 7-10, 2022, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan
749