Switching Sources: A Study of People’s Exploratory 
Search Behavior on Social Media and the Web 
    
Dongho Choi, Ziad Matni, Chirag Shah  
School of Communication & Information (SC&I), Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey  
4 Huntington St, New Brunswic k, NJ 08901    
{dongho.j.choi, zmatni, chirags}@rutgers.edu   
 
ABSTRACT 
Searching the Web for information via search engines is a 
ubiquitous phenomenon and a well-established  field of 
study in Information Science. Social media sites also 
continue to evol ve and by now have gained enough 
popularity and momentum to be used as not just vessels for 
communication with others, but also as important repositories of information. However, it  is not clear if the 
information behavior of users of traditional search en gines 
differ from those performing information searches strictly 
on social media sites. To address this, we examined data 
from two user studies on people's exploratory s earching 
behavior: one group only used Web sea rch engines, while 
the other exclusively used social media sites to search for 
information. Information search behaviors of b oth groups 
regarding exploratory tasks were observed and analyzed 
through search log and surveys. The results indicate that, 
while people using social media sites for exploratory search 
tasks find a smaller quantity and a less diverse set of 
documents than what they might discover when utilizing 
traditional Web search engines, they do perceive to end up with more relevant documents. They also report doing less 
work and feeli ng less challenged.  
Keywords  
Exploratory search, s ocial media, information search 
behavior  
INTRODUCTION  
The Web, as it stands today, contains a multitude of rich 
and varied information, much of it generated and shared by ordinary users of the Internet. Th e default tool that most 
people use when searching for information on the Web has been the ever ubiquitous search engine personified strongly by such services such as Google, Yahoo, and Bing. However, in the last few years, social media services su ch 
as Facebook (71 %), Twitter (23%) and reddit (6 %), among others  (Duggan, Ellison, Lampe, Lenhart, & Madden, 
2015) , hav e become ever more popular as places to go to 
that contain a lot of information that is both user -generated 
and professionally vetted or edited. For example, a social media user might come across information in the form of 
personal comments or opinions, as  well as links to online 
news articles from more traditional sources. With access to 
ever-growing networks of users and with information 
seeking tools of their own, many social media sites are quickly becoming alternative venues for online users to seek and find information. Moreover, many social media sites give their users access to a social network of friends, 
acquaintances, subject matter experts, celebrities, and so on. 
This makes social media sites attractive sites for people to visit when searching for information, espec ially in the 
exploratory phase.  
The manner in which people create information and 
content, and share it through their social media networks is 
different across the particular social media they use. As these social media platforms influ ence the social 
communication infrastructure of society, a fairly large number of scholarly works have used social media as sources of data for understanding social activities, public opinion, political action, and other socially -related things. 
Does this mean, however, that people's information search 
behavior on social media sites differs from when they use 
search engines? It is worthy to note that Web search 
engines do not scan the entirety of the Web (for example, 
they do not have acce ss to a lot of wha t is termed “the 
Invisible Web ,” that is, content that is not indexed by 
standard search engines). We will therefore refer to the 
portion of the Web that is searched by standard search 
engines and returned on search engine results page (SERP) 
in this article as the “ visible Web.”  
In this paper, we try to answer that question by comparing using study data acquired from two sets of people: one that has searched for online information using search engines and another that was limited to using social media site s. We 
propose an evaluation framework that includes five categories and present findings that show that exploratory 
search using popular Web search engines yielded more 
numerous and diverse documents than when performing searches exclusively on social medi a sites, however, social 
media site searches provided higher perceived relevant 
 
  
 
ASIST 2015 ,November 6 -10, 2015 , St. Louis, MO, USA.  
 
Author Retains Copyright.results. Additionally, people who performed exploratory 
searches on social media sites reported feeling more positive about certain aspects of cognitive load. More specifically , they felt less challenged with the task at hand, 
which also felt like less hard work compared to that done using Web search engines.  
BACKGROUND  
Exploratory Search  
Marchionini (2006)  divides  search behaviors into three 
types that he calls lookup, learn, and investigate. Lookup  is 
the most basic kind of search task and has been the main 
focus of scholarly work  on Web search engines and 
information retrieval (IR) techniques. Exploratory search, 
however, is more akin to the learn  and investigate  
activities. White and Roth (2009)  define exploratory  search 
as a “sense making activity focused on the gathering and use of information to fo ster intellectual development.”  
Users who conduct exploratory searches are generally unfamiliar with the domain of their goals, and unsure about how to achieve them (White & Roth, 2009) . Considering 
the dynamic and evolving nature of exploratory search, many scholars have investigated the main factors relating to 
the this type of task, such as uncertainty, creativity, 
innovation, know ledge discovery, serendipity, convergence 
of ideas, learning, and investigation (Bawden, 1986; Budd, 
2004; Foster & Ford, 2003; Marchionini, 2006; Whi te & 
Roth, 2009) .  
Another important area of study in IR is information 
evaluation. A number of measures have been developed to evaluate IR performance based on user and system wide metrics (Saracevic, 1995) . Traditional IR measures include 
recall, precision, mean average precision (MAP), mean 
reciprocal rank (MRR), and novelty.  
Vakkari's evaluati on framework (2010)  focused on 
analyzing information need and search formulation. 
Measures of success in explicating information needs include a measure of exhaustivity, specificity, combined measure, and conceptual integration, while search formulation is measured by two concepts: term selection for representing search concepts, and query formation for 
combining search terms as a query. Spink (2002)  proposed 
an evaluative framework for exploratory search by applying 
a user -centered approach with the use of a new search tool 
covering effectiveness and usability. Shah et al. (2015)  
suggested an evaluation framework that includes a variety 
of measures that gauge the amount of information one 
discovers through exploratory searching  (Information 
Exposure ), the goodness of inform ation discovered 
(Information Relevancy ), the way informati on is sought and 
retrieved ( Information Seeking), the overall goodness  of the 
search process ( Performance ), and the learning that takes 
place  in the search process ( Learning ).  
Social Search  
After the emergence of Web 2.0 in the last decade or so, 
and especially after the advent of social media and its subsequent popularity, a rich amount of information has been generated and shared by ordinary users of the Internet. 
This information conveys all man ner of news, facts, 
opinion, emotions, entertainment, and multiple creative outlets, among other things. Moreover, as numerous forms of social media have emerged, multiple ways in which 
people generate and share information have also emerged. 
The manner in  which people create information and 
content, and share it through their social media networks is 
different across the particular social media they use. As these social media platforms influence the social communication infrastructure of society at large, a fair large 
number of scholarly works have used social media as 
sources of data for understanding social activities (Kooti, 
Yang, Cha, Gummadi, & Mason, 2012; Naaman, Boase, & 
Lai, 2010) , public opinion (Bennett & Iyengar, 2008; 
Castells, 2008) , political action (Parsons, 2009; Siegel, 
2009)  and more.  
The term social search  refers to the use of social 
mechanisms to find online information. This type of search makes the use of search engines that social media provide, 
or the use of community members' responses and interaction about the search results (Morris, Teevan, & 
Bush, 2008; Smyth, Briggs, Coyle, & O’Mahony, 2009), as well as social tagging structures. Evans and Chi (2008)  
defined social search  as an overarching term used to 
describe searching for information that makes use of social 
interactions with others, whether implicitly or explicitly, 
geographically co -located ly or remotely, or in synchronous 
or asynchronous time (p. 485).   
People search for social media information in at least two ways (Efron, 2011; Sullivan, 2009a, 2009b) : 
• They ask questions to their friends or followers in the hopes that their networks will answer them.  
• They conduct searches over preexisting social media data in the hope of finding out relevant in formation.  
Research in the first approach has shown that many social media posting, such as Tweets involve asking or answering 
questions. Morris, Teevan, and Panovich (2010)  reported 
that a half of respondents in their survey had used Facebook 
or Twitter to ask questions.  Considering the “asking for 
information” practice, research has been conducted to 
investigate the differences between search engines and 
social media and their complementary roles in information 
seeking (De Chou dhury, Morris, & White, 2014; Morris, 
Teevan, & Panovich, 2010; Morris & Teevan, 2012) . Those 
two online services can help users find useful information 
with asking their networks as well  as using search engines 
(Morri s et al., 2010; Morris & Teevan, 2012) , for instance, 
relating to health information (De Choudhury et al., 2014) . 
Teevan et al. (2011)  compared search behavior on one type 
of social media platform, Twitter, using query logs and supplemental qualitative data, to find out people search Twitter to seek temporarily relevant information and information related to people.Several numbers of formal models  have been proposed  to 
describe the interaction of social information seeking with 
the use of online information sources  (Evans & Chi, 2008; 
Evans, Kairam, & Pirolli, 2009; Pirolli, 2009) . However, 
little attention has been paid to how people search social 
media, and how they explore the search results (Efron, 
2011) . To address this “social media search” problem, 
Efron mentioned several IR concepts that could make ways into retrieval settings over socia l media: sentiment  analysis 
and opinion mining, entity search, user -generated metadata, 
authority and influence . 
Research Questions  
From the literature review, we have found that little research on the evaluation of social media search has been conducted, especially in the context of exploratory search. 
In this paper, we explore the information behavior of users doing exploratory information searches on social media. To better understand this behavior, we ask the following two research questions:  
1. In an exp loratory search task, to what extent, if any, are 
there differences in information behavior between visible Web  searching and social media searching?  
2. To what extent, if any, does using a particular social 
media for exploratory search task show different information usage pattern?  
STUDY 
Data Sets  
For this paper, we use two data sets from two separate, yet 
similar, user studies. These two studies target similar participants and impose similar session workflows and 
search topics for the tasks at hand. The firs t data set is fro m 
a 2013 study on user logs in v isible Web search conditions 
(Study 1). The second data set is culled from a user study 
done in 2014 that looked at participants' information seeking through social media (Study 2).  
In both studies, a loggi ng tool installed in the Firefox Web 
browser was used. The tool has a powerful logging functionality capable of recording users' action within the browser, which includes Webpage visited and queries run 
on Web search engines. All of this data was recorded with 
timestamps.  
Participants  
In the recruitment stage for both studies, we asked 
undergraduate students from a major Northeastern US university to participate in a study through open calls via 
various email -lists. Participants were each compensated $10 
in cash upon completion of the study. There were 12 
participants in Study 1 and 13 participants in Study 2.  
Session Workflow  
The experimental session workflows for both studies were 
similarly designed. Each session lasted approximately 45 to 50 minutes and  structured in six stages. Session workflows 
are desc ribed in Table 1. The researchers guided the 
participants through each stage.  
Tasks  
For Study 1, participants were asked to collect relevant information in an exploratory search  task on the topic of 
“global warming” as follows:  
“A leading newspaper agency has hired your team to create a comprehensive report on the causes, effects, and 
consequences of the climate change taking place due to 
global warming. As a part of your contrac t, you are 
required to collect all relevant information from any 
available online sources that you can find . 
Your report on this topic should address the following: Description about global warming, how if affects climate change, scientific evidence about global warming affecting 
climate change, causes of global warming, consequences of global warming causing climate change, measures that 
different countries around the globe has taken over the 
years to address this issue and recent advancements in 
addressin g this issue.  Also describe different view  points  
people have about global warming (specify at least three 
different view points you find) and relate those to the aspects controversies held by the public on this topic.”  
For Study 2, participants were asked to do an exploratory 
search to write a short report on the topic of “the midterm 
elections of 2014 in the United States.” as follows:  
“For this task, we would like you to look up something on 
social media, collect data, and tell us your thoughts on 
what y ou have discovered. Specifically, we'd like you to (a) 
consider the following topic: The midterm elections of 2014 
in the United States, (b) select at least two social media 
sources to collect data on the topic (c) collect a reasonable amount of data on th e topic from the social media sources. 
Limit your data collection to the social media sources and 
do not search for data outside of them.  
Using this data, write 2 or 3 paragraphs that cover the following aspects: (1) What were some of the main 
discussion p oints or subtopics for this topic? (2) What were 
some of the positive/negative views or opinions on this topic that you found? and (3) How would you describe some of the differences you found amongst the different social media sources that you looked at?”   
Evaluation Framework  
The users in Study 1 engaged with a search engine (Google, 
specifically) to do exploratory search on the Web, whereas 
the users in Study 2 exclusively used social media sites as both search mechanisms and information sources for their  
exploratory searches.Stage  Description  Time (min)  
1 Introduction to the study and consent form: Participants were introduced to the study and asked to sign 
a consent form . 3 
2 Introduction on how to use tools: Researchers confirmed that all particip ants knew how to use Web -
based search engines (Study 1) or how to search for information on social media sites (Study 2).  3 
3 Pre-task questionnaires: Participants filled out a pre -task questionnaire, which included technical and 
task familiarity, and also sought out demographic information.  3 
4 Task description: Participants were given their task descriptions.  3 
5 Task: Participants worked on their tasks, which included searching for and collecting relevant 
information that was then used to write a brie f report. 30-35 
6 Post-task questionnaires: Participants filled out a post -task questionnaire, which included questions 
about their perceived difficulties of and confidence in accomplishing their tasks as well as a simplified 
version of NASA's Task Load I ndex  (TLX) (Hart & Staveland, 1988) . 3 
Table 1. Study session workflow
In order to compare and evaluate the differences between 
the information behaviors of people performing exploratory searches through Web search engines and others doing s o 
through social media sites, we considered some of the measures suggested in (Shah, 2014)  and (Shah et al., 2015) , 
as described in Table 2. 
Information Exposure  
The concept of Information Exposure refers to the amount 
of information a searcher discovers during an exploratory 
search task. In  the case of our study, the information 
primarily refers to the visited Web documents (e.g., Web 
pages and social media p ages/postings). In addition to 
Recall , a popular measure used in information retrieval (IR) 
studies to gauge information exposure, we a lso use a 
measure proposed by Shah et al. ( 2015) , called Coverage . 
This is defined as:  
Coverageui={dui1,dui2,...,duin} (1) 
where,  Coverageui is a set of distinct documents ( duin) 
visited by user ui. 
Another variable, Unique Coverage , refers to the set of 
Web documents that were visited exclusively  by one user.  
UniqueCoverageui=Coverageui∉ Coverageul
l∉{i}∪(2) 
We assume that Web documents with a high likelihood of 
discovery are easier to find and are common among the 
majority of the user groups, while Web documents with a  
low likelihood are difficult to find and reach.  A participant 
finding th ese Web documents is being more effective in 
discovering information that is not just relevant, but also 
diverse. In order to operationalize this idea, Shah & 
González -Ibáñez (2011)  as well as Shah (2014)  use a 
formulation similar  to that of inverse document frequency 
(IDF), called Likelihood of Discovery (LD) . 
 (3)  (4) 
LD di is the likelihood of discovery va lue for each Web 
document, di, and n{d i} refers to the frequency of the We b 
document di in the Universe  of distinct Web doc uments, 
which is defined in eq (4 ). LD di is the likelihood of 
discovery value for each Web document, di, and n{d i} refers 
to the frequency of the We b document di in the Universe  of 
distinct Web documents, which is defined in eq (4 ). Each 
Web document is as signed with a normalized value 
between -1 and 0, where those Web documents with a value 
close to 0 are rare and unique, while those close to -1 are 
more likely to be visited by the participants.  Based on the 
measures above, the average likelihood of discov ery visited 
by a particular participant can be defined as follows:  
 (5) 
The traditional IR measure, Recall , as used in this study is 
measured in co njunction with other measures 
(RelevantCoverage  and the Universe of RelevantCoverage , 
Ur) that relate to information relevancy, which we expound 
on further in the next section.  
Recallui=|RelevantCoverageui|
|Ur| (6) 
Ur= relevantCoverageui
i∪ (7) 
Information Relevancy  
This category refers to the “goodness” of information 
discovered regarding  the relevancy of the task topic.  Proxy 
for information relevancy  is RelevantCoverage , defined as:
  
RelevantCoverageui={rdui1,rdui2,...,rduin} (8) 
where RelevantCoverage ui is a set of distinct relevant  
documents ( rduin) visited and copied, in part or in its 
entirety, by the user.  LDdi=−1⋅n{di}
|U|U=Coverageui
i=1m
∪
LDui=LDdi l=1|Coverageui|∑
|Coverageui|Category  Measure  Description  
Information 
Exposure  Coverage  The total number of distinct Web documents visited by a participant  
Unique Coverage  The total number of Web documents visited only by one participant  
Average Likelihood 
of Discovery  The average effect iveness of participant to find relevant and diverse information  
Recall  The fraction of the documents that are relevant to the query that are successfully 
retrieved  
Information 
Relevancy Relevant Coverage The total number of distinct relevant Web documen ts visited by a participant  
Unique Relevant 
Coverage  The total number of distinct relevant Web documents visited only by one participant  
Precision  The fraction of the documents retrieved that are relevant to the user's information 
need 
Information 
Seeking Number of Distinct 
Queries  The number of distinct queries that were submitted to Web search engines or SM 
search engines by participant  
Performance  F-score The weighted harmonic mean of precision and recall  
Cognitive 
Load  Challenge  The extent to which a participant felt the task was challenging  
Confidence  The extent to which a participant was confident in the information found  
Mental Demand  The extent to which a participant felt mental demands completing the task  
Physical Demand  The extent to w hich a participant felt physical demands completing the task  
Hard Work  The extent to which a participant did work hard to complete the task  
Negative Affect  The extent to which a participant felt negative  
Table 2. Evaluation fra mework
Based on the definition of RelevantCoverage  in eq. (8), 
UniqueRelevantCoverage  is defined as follows:  
UniqueRelevantCoverageui=uniqueCoverageuiUr∩(9) 
The tr aditional IR measure of Precision is also used in this 
study as shown in  ( eq. 10 ). 
Precisionui=|RelevantCoverageui|
|Coverageui| (10) 
Information Seeking  
This category refers to the way users seek and retrieve 
information. In exploratory search, a user submits a number of queries in order to gather meaningful and relevant 
information for his or her information needs. As used by 
Shah et al. (2015) , we also de fine a variable called Q
ui 
which is defined as the set of distinct queri es issued by a 
participant ui. This tells us the quality and quantity of 
information seeking behav ior of a particular user (eq. 11).  
 (11) Performance  
This c ategory refers to the overall “goodness” of the  search 
process. We use F-score as the primary measure for 
Performance . 
Fui=2⋅Precisionui⋅Recallui
Precisionui+Recallui (12) 
In addition to F-score, we looked  into using measures of 
Effectiveness and Efficiency , as did (Shah, 2014) , to 
understand how quickly and effectively a user was at 
finding useful information. However, we decided to 
exclude those two measures from our evaluation framework because the 30- second rule that determined usefulness of a 
particular page did not apply to our c ases in Study 2. The 
30-second dwell -time rule (Fox, Karnawat, & Mydland, 
2005; White & Huang, 2010 ) determines whether the 
clicked link from a search engine results page ( SERP ) is 
perceived as useful to the searcher. However, given that most social media sites have very different page formats, 
this criteria may not be suitable to determine usefulness.  
For example, Twitter imposes a 140 -character limit on 
tweets. Some users express their thoughts and opinions 
within that limit, while others include external links to provide additional relevant facts and/or related information. Qui=DistinctQueriesuiTherefore, a tweet has at least two dimensions to its 
usefulness: the usefulness of the tweet itself and the 
usefulness of the linked documents. Since usefulness depends on the searcher's information need and intentions, 
some might determine the usefulness of a tweet by 
skimming the words it contains. This typically takes less 
than 30 seconds.  
Cognitive Load  
Participants in the studies were given a post -task 
questionnaire that included the following questions 
regarding the challenges and difficulties during their tasks.  
• Q1. How chal lenging was this task? 
• Q2. How confident are you in the information you found on this research topic?  
• Q3. How mentally demanding was this research task?  
• Q4. How physically demanding was this research task?  
• Q5. How hard did you have to work to accomplish yo ur 
level of performance?  
• Q6. How insecure, discouraged, irritated, stressed, and annoyed were you? 
Responses to Q1 and Q2 in both studies were measured by 
a 5-level Likert scale. However, with question Q3 through 
Q6, Study 1 measured the participants with a 21 -level 
Likert scale, whereas Study 2 used a more typical 5 -level 
scale for those questions. In order to compare the responses 
from this latter set of questions, we converted the responses 
of Study 1 into a 5 -level scale.  
RESULTS  
In order to compare the  measures of evaluation framework 
for different experimen tal conditions, an independent t -test 
was conduct ed (Table 3).  
Information Exposure 
In the condition of Open Web, such information primarily 
refers to the visited Webpages,  while user -generated 
information on social media is included in the condition of 
social media, as well as the Webpages linked and visited 
through social media. The results ( Table 3) indicate that 
there are significant differences  for Coverage, Average 
Likelihood of Discovery and Recall.  Study 1 participants 
visited more Web documents (M = 17.5, SD = 6.63) than 
ones in Study 2 (M = 8.85, SD = 4.95). Also, given that the 
value of Likelihood of Discovery  close to 0 means the 
particip ant sought and found out diverse documents, Study 
1 participants were exposed more diverse perspectives of information during the task (Study 1: M = -0.009, SD = 
0.004, Study 2: M = -0.126, SD = 0.030). However, the 
values of Recall indicate that in spite of the limited number 
of visiting documents, Study 2 participants were successful to find out relevant documents (Study 1: M = 0.05, SD = 0.02, Study 2: M = 0.13, SD = 0.08) .  
Information Relevancy  
The results indicate that Study 1  has higher Relevant 
Cove rage ( p < 0.05) than Study 2, which means that people used visible Web search engines tended to visit more 
relevant Web documents than who used social media. In the same context, the value of Precision from Study 1 and 
Study 2 are significantly different: Study 1 (M = 0.398, SD 
= 0.197) vs. Study 2 (M = 0.754, SD = 0.202). Study 2 
participants looked for relatively less document s 
(Coverage ) and found l ess relevant documents ( Relevant 
Coverage ), but the Precision values have shown that Study 
2 participants w ere able to effectively find documents from 
relevant information (Study 1: M = 0.398, SD = 0.197, Study 2: M = 0.754, SD = 0.202).  
Information Seeking  
In terms of the distinct queries from Study 2, note that we excluded queries submitted to popular search engines (e.g., 
“twitter midterm elections 2014”), rather than social media, 
and identified queries with combination of social media 
platform the queries were submitted to (A query “midterm elections 2014” to Twitter was separately counted from one to reddi t). Also, in the case of Facebook, some users have 
tried to enter queries in window in Facebook interface. 
However, Facebook did not allow users to issue queries of 
interest, but it automatically found and showed them the 
relevant pages, posts, people base d on the each character 
that was entered into the search window.  As a result, 
participants were distracted to the results and could not complete the query searching - This phenomenon hindered 
us to observe ordinary information seeking process with 
regard t o search queries. Thus, we excluded Facebook case 
from the data even if a participant tried to use the search 
feature. Study 1 participants who used the search engine were likely to issue more queries (M = 9.42, SD = 4.30) 
than who used social media in Stu dy 2 (M = 3.62, SD = 
2.22).  This result supports Teevan et al.'s findings about 
searching behavior on Twitter: (1) Twitter queries are 
shorter, (2) more popular, and (3) less likely to evolve during a session (Teevan et al., 2011) . Considering that 
some participants in Study 2 repeat the same quer y on 
particular social media platforms, we can infer that people make sense of an issue through monitoring the associated 
search results from social media, while change and develop 
queries for search engines to learn the topic.  
Performance  
Not surprisingl y, Study 2 (M = 0.085, SD = 0.038) 
achieved a higher F -score than Study 1 (M = 0.213, SD = 
0.119), given that Study 2 had both higher recall and 
precision.  
Cognitive Load  
Among the six measures in the Cognitive Load  category, 
Challenge  and Hard Work  show s ignificant differences 
between Study 1 and Study 2. Participants in Study 1 (M = 
4.08, SD = 0.80) felt significantly ( p < 0.01 ) more 
challenged by the task than participants in Study 2 (M = 2.38, SD = 0.87). Also, participants who used visible Web 
search e ngines (Study 1) reported that they worked 
significantly harder ( p < 0.01)  than participants who used  
social  media platforms for information searching  (Study 1:Measures  Units  Study 1 (N=12)  Study 2 (N=13)  Difference  
Information Exposure  
Coverage  Docs  17.5 (6.63)  8.85 (4.95)  8.65** 
Unique Coverage  Docs  6.42 (4.66)  5.69 (4.07)  0.73 
Avg. Likelihood of Discovery  Score  -0.009 (0.004)  -0.126 (0.030)  0.117** 
Recall  Score  0.05 (0.02)  0.13 (0.08)  -0.08** 
Information Relevancy  
Relevant Coverage Docs  11.08 (5.18)  6.85 (4.41)  4.23* 
Unique Relevant Coverage  Docs  2.42 (2.28)  4.15 (3.53)  -1.73 
Precision  Score  0.398 (0.197)  0.754 (0.202)  -0.356** 
Information Seeking   
Distinct Queries  Queries  9.42 (4.30)  3.62 (2.22)  5.80** 
Performance   
F-score Score  0.085 (0.038)  0.213 (0.119)  -0.128** 
Cognitive Load  
Challenge  Score  4.08 (0.80)  2.38 (0.87)  1.70** 
Confidence  Score  2.67 (1.07)  3.46 (0.97)  -0.73 
Mental Demand  Score  2.50 (0.91)  2.31 (0.86)  0.19 
Physical Demand  Score  1.50 (0.67)  1.15 (0.38)  0.35 
Hard Work  Score 3.75 (0.97)  2.54 (0.78)  1.21** 
Negative Affect  Score  2.08 (1.38)  1.77 (1.17)  0.31 
Table 3. Means per study for various measures and the differences (*: p<0.05, **: p<0.01).  
M = 3.75, SD = 0.97; Study 2: M = 2.54, SD = 0.78). The 
results of the other measures show that Study 1 was 
perceived to require more mental and physical effort, 
elicited more negative affect, and less confidence on the 
search results, however these differences were not 
significant.  
DISCUSSION 
Results based  on the evaluation framework in the study 
revealed significant differences of search behavior between 
using visible Web search engines and searching through 
social media. Looking at a big picture, we observe that people in Study 1 clicked on more documents  in their 
search results, as inferred from the measure of Coverage , 
but people in Study 2 felt that their retrieved documents were more relevant, as seen in the Precision measure. Both 
measures of Unique Coverage  and of Unique Relevant 
Coverage  from the tw o studies are not significantly 
different. However, they do suggest that that social media search results might provide people with more diverse 
information despite their limited extent of coverage.  
Figure 1 shows a conceptual  comparison between the 
search results achieved by users in Study 1 versus Study 2. 
It shows that the documents within the visible Web are a 
distinct set from those documents within social media, although the two sets certainly intersect. In addition, some 
social media documents may n ot be in the visible Web. It 
was a moot point to show documents that were neither in 
the visible Web, nor in the social media set.   
Figure 1. Conceptual Description of User Search 
Results in Study 1 vs Study 2  
illustrates  that, a lthough users in Study 1 were exposed to a 
higher number of documents (that sometimes included docum ents from social media sites), users in Study 2, who 
almost always retrieved documents from social media sites, 
were exposed to  a higher proportion of relev ant documents 
because, by simply choosing to go to social media sites for 
their searches, they selected a smaller set  of documents that 
were de facto better suited to their information n eeds. This 
is a form of social information filtering  and is partlyaccomplished because a user looks to other users of the 
social media site who might have similar interests in the same topic(s) for their opinions and guidance on an informational topic. These users also generate a lot of 
relevant content in these social medi a documents. Social 
information filtering complements content -based filtering 
(like those implemented by each social media site's search 
and presentation algorithms) becau se it automates the effect 
of “word -of-mouth”  coming from like -minded people using 
the social media service (Shardanand & Maes, 1995) .   
Since people who conduct exploratory searches are generally unsure about how to achieve their information seeking goals, they benefit by observing and monitoring 
others' opinions and interactions on social media. Note that, 
as Figure 1 demonstrates, sometimes returned documents 
from a Study 1 -type search are gotten from social media 
sites, and sometimes returned documents in a Study 2 -type 
search are gotten from Web sites that not from the origin 
social media domain. A small overl ap of a set of returned 
documents from both types of search can exist, but we 
cannot demonstrate this with our data since the search topics for both studies were not alike.  
Descriptive Observations and Social Media Site Use  
Unlike Study 1, in which the visible Web was the starting 
point for the exploratory search, Study 2 ensured that social media sites were that starting point. The social media sites 
that were used in Study 2 are shown in  Figure 2. Out of a 
total 13 participants,  more than half used reddit 
(reddit.com ) (9) and Twitter (8). Facebook and BuzzFeed 
(buzzfeed.com ) received the same number of participants 
(4), while imgur ( imgur.com ) and LinkedIn ( linkedin.com ) 
only had one visitor each. The number of participants visiting and the total number of queries suggest that visual 
sites like imgur and Facebook engendered the highest 
number of query activity, relative to the number of visits, whereas the more textual -based sites had a lower ratio. We 
present these numbers as interesting, but not necessarily significant findings as the sheer number of participants in 
this case is low. One of the interesting findings from our 
observation on how people used Twitter is that the queries were shorter and less likely to evolve or change  as part of a 
search session, compared to Web search engine queries. Also, people repeated Twitter queries in order to monitor 
the associated search results, since Twitter, like other social 
media sites, present a much more dynamic results page that 
can change every few seconds. Web search engine users change and develop their queries, query reformulation , 
when trying to improve their search results (Rieh & Xie, 
2006) . Social media information seekers, on the other hand, 
are presented with two orthogonal parameters th at have 
significant outcomes on their search results: the query, and the fact that social media content changes rapidly in time. As such, we observe, that these users prefer to keep one of these parameters constant (i.e. the query), while allowing 
the othe r parameter to influence the outcome of their 
search.   
 Figure 2. Social Media Usage in Study 2  
Different reflections on Facebook's search features are also 
interesting and merit closer examination. As previously mentioned, when a user enters search queries in the search 
bar on Facebook, the search engine automatically looks for people, pages, groups and other related information registered on that social media site, and shows its results in list form. Some participants in Study 2 described the search 
feature on Facebook as follows:  
“Facebook was not very appropriate for research, since typing the topic into the search bar only turned up relevant groups/events/pages. There had a few links on them, but nothing that turned out to be really useful.”  
“Honestly, I never realized how easy it was to find information on Twitter as compared to Facebook... On 
Facebook searching for the same information was rather 
tedious and time consuming.”  
However, an almost equal amount of participants als o 
praised Facebook's quality as an information source:  
“I believe that Facebook was a good tool to research 
different nominees using their personal pages while Twitter 
was a good tool to see what different sources are saying, opinion wise.”  
“Facebook was t he much more appropriate source for 
researching this topic given that they provided information that was much more neutral... It was much easier to find good information on Facebook rather than Twitter.”  
These observations imply that the aforementioned filtering effect that social media sites have on information seekers relates to individual users' contexts, regardless of if the 
searcher seeks subjective or objective information, or if the 
searcher takes advantage of accepting suggestions presented 
in the s ocial media service or not. If information seekers 
engaged in exploratory search tasks need to select information sources amongst a limited number of social media services, then each site's features need to be 
considered.  
Limitations  
Our data sets came fr om two different studies that have 
similar experimental environments and restrictions but were 
not exactly the same. One of the important differencesbetween them was the topic given to the participants in their 
information search tasks. Study 1 gave the p articipants the 
topic of “global warming” , while Study 2 asked th em to 
look for information on “the midterm elections of 2014 in 
the United States. ” Furthermore, the task instructions given 
in Study 2 encouraged users to look for others people's 
opinions and reflections, whereas the other study's 
instructions emphasized looking for relevant facts. This 
difference could conceivably influence the relevancy of 
searched Web documents as perceived by the participants 
because the participants in Study 1 might hav e been 
motivated to gather more information in order to write their required reports, whereas Study 2 participants might have been satisfied with a relatively smaller number of Web documents that contained discourses on the results and 
outlooks of the election results.  
Additionally, different searching behaviors on social media 
could be partially due to participants' differing research 
experiences. If we had conducted similar experiments with 
trained graduate students and research scholars instead, we might  have observed different results and come to different 
conclusions. Also, t he number of different sources explored 
is necessarily related to the diversity of information and the unique culture on each social media site influences content 
of information and  social interaction that takes place in it. If 
we had insisted on participants to use a larger amount of 
social media sites as sources , our relevancy and coverage 
measures might have been different.  
Future Work  
White and Roth (2009)  suggested that traditional IR 
measures based on retrieval accuracy, such as precision, 
recall, mean reciprocal rank (MRR), and mean average 
precision (MAP), might be inappropriate to use in 
exploratory search due  to that process' complexity and the 
uniqueness. Significant differences revealed in our results 
might be due not only to the substantial differences between visible Web search engines and social media platforms, but 
also to the characteristics of explorat ory search. It is 
important to investigate and introduce new measures that could complement the ones used in this study in order to better capture users' perceptions on information they find on social media as compared to what they might acquire from Web S ERPs.  
As we mentioned in the evaluation framework section , 
dwell -time, a measure typically used for determining the 
usefulness of a document was not considered in this study. The criteria for determining usefulness are quite dependent 
on the format of the presented search results. As such, 
different social media platforms (which all differ 
considerably from typical Web SERPs) should conceivably show different optimal dwell -times. We can measure these 
in future studies using instruments like eye -tracking 
sensors.  
CONCLUSIONS 
We have presented our work that compares exploratory search behavior of people on social media and the visible Web. We evaluated Information Exposure, Information 
Relevancy , Information Seeking , Performance , and 
Cognitive Load , as propose d in previous studies (Shah, 
2014; Shah et al., 2015) . Our evaluation showed that people 
who used social media sites to do exploratory searches were 
able to find a proportionally higher number of relevant 
documents than those using Web search engines, despite 
their exposure to smaller amounts of documents. These findings seem to be informed by the social information filtering inherent to social media services. Also, our results 
indicated that participants who searched through social 
media felt less challenged by the task and did not work as hard as those who did similar tasks using typical Web search engines.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The work reported here is supported by the National  Science Foundation (NSF) BCC -SBE award no. 
1244704 and the  Institute of Museum and Library Services 
(IMLS) grant  no. RE-04-12-0105- 12. 
 
REFERENCES 
Bawden, D . (1986). Information systems and the 
stimulation of creativity. Journal of Information 
Science , 12(5), 203 –216. 
Bennett, W. L., & Iyengar, S. (2008). A New Era of 
Minimal Effects? The Changing Foundations of Political Communication. Journal of Communicati on, 
58(4), 707 –731. 
Budd, J. M. (2004). Relevance !: Language , Semantics , 
Philosophy.  
Castells, M. (2008). The New Public Sphere: Global Civil 
Society, Communication Networks, and Global Governance. The ANNALS of the American Academy 
of Political and Soci al Science , 616(1), 78 –93. 
De Choudhury, M., Morris, M. R., & White, R. W. (2014). 
Seeking and sharing health information online. Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’14 , 
1365– 1376.  
Duggan, M., Ellison,  N. B., Lampe, C., Lenhart, A., & 
Madden, M. (2015). Social Media Update 2014.  
Efron, M. (2011). Information Search and Retrieval in 
Microblogs. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology , 62(6), 996 –
1008.  
Evans, B. M., & Chi, E . H. (2008). Towards a Model of 
Understanding Social Search. In Proceeding of the 
2008 ACM workshop on Search in social media  (pp. 
485– 494).  
Evans, B. M., Kairam, S., & Pirolli, P. (2009). Exploring 
the cognitive consequences of social search. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on HumanFactors in Computing Systems (CHI 2009) , 3377 –
3382.  
Foster, A., & Ford, N. (2003). Serendipity and information 
seeking: an empirical study. Journal of 
Documentation . 
Fox, S., Karnawat, K., & Mydland, M. (2005). Evaluating 
implicit measures to improve web search. ACM 
Transactions on Information Systems , 23(2), 147 –
168. 
Hart, S. G., & Staveland, L. E. (1988). Development of 
NASA- TLX (Task Load Index): Results of empirical 
and theoretical research. Advances in Psychology, 52, 
139– 183. 
Kooti, F., Yang, H., Cha, M., Gummadi, P., & Mason, W. 
(2012). The Emergence of Conventions in Online 
Social Networks. ICWSM . 
Marchionini, G. (2006). Exploratory Search: From Finding 
to Understanding. Communications of the ACM , 
49(4), 41 –46. 
Morris, M. R., & Teevan, J. (2012). Exploring the 
Complementary Roles of Social Networks and Search Engines. Human -Computer Interaction Consortium 
Workshop (HCIC) , 1–10. 
Morris, M. R., Teevan, J., & Bush, S. (2008). Enhancing 
collaborative web search with personal ization: 
groupization, smart splitting, and group hit-highlighting. Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 
3. 
Morris, M. R., Teevan, J., & Panovich, K. (2010). What Do 
People Ask Their Social Networks, and Why? In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Huma n 
factors in computing systems  (pp. 1739 –1748).  
Morris, M., Teevan, J., & Panovich, K. (2010). A 
Comparison of Information Seeking Using Search Engines and Social Networks. ICWSM , 291 –294. 
Naaman, M., Boase, J., & Lai, C. (2010). Is it really about 
me?: me ssage content in social awareness streams. In 
Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work  (pp. 189 –
192). New York, New York, USA: ACM.  
Parsons, B. M. (2009). Social Networks and the Affective 
Impact of Political Disagreeme nt. Political Behavior , 
32(2), 181 –204. 
Pirolli, P. (2009). An elementary social information 
foraging model. Proceedings of the 27th International 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI 09 , 605 –614. 
Rieh, S. Y., & Xie, H. (2006). Analysis o f multiple query 
reformulations on the web: The interactive information retrieval context. Information Processing 
and Management , 42, 751 –768. Saracevic, T. (1995). Evaluation of Evaluation in 
Information Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 18th 
annual intern ational ACM SIGIR on Research and 
development in information retrieval  (pp. 138 –146).  
Shah, C. (2014). Evaluating collaborative information 
seeking - synthesis, suggestions, and structure. 
Journal of Information Science , 40(4), 460 –475. 
Shah, C., & Gonzále z-Ibáñez, R. (2011). Evaluating the 
synergic effect of collaboration in information 
seeking. In Proceedings of the 34th international 
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and 
development in Information - SIGIR ’11 (p. 913). 
New York, New York, USA: ACM Press.  
Shah, C., Hendahewa, C., & González -ibáñez, R. (2015). 
Two’s Company, But Three's No Crowd: Evaluating Exploratory Web Search for Individuals and Teams. Journal of Information Science , Under revi . 
Shardanand, U., & Maes, P. (1995). Social information 
filtering. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’95 , 
210– 217. 
Siegel, D. a. (2009). Social Networks and Collective 
Action. American Journal of Political Science, 53(1), 
122– 138. 
Smyth, B., Briggs, P., Coyle, M., & O’M ahony, M. (2009). 
Google shared. A case -study in social search. In User 
Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization  (pp. 283 –
294).  
Spink, A. (2002). A user -centered approach to evaluating 
human interaction with Web search engines: an exploratory study. Information Processing & 
Management , 38(3), 401 –426. 
Sullivan, D. (2009a). The rise of help engines: Twitter 
&Aardvark.  
Sullivan, D. (2009b). To Twitter or Dodgeball at SXSW.  
Teevan, J., Ramage, D., & Morris, M. R. (2011). 
#TwitterSearch: a comparison of microb log search 
and web search. Proceedings of the Fourth ACM 
International Conference on Web Search and Data 
Mining - WSDM ’11 , 35. 
Vakkari, P. (2010). Exploratory Searching As Conceptual 
Exploration. In Proceedings of HCIR  (pp. 24 –27). 
White, R., & Huang, J. (2010). Assessing the Scenic Route: 
Measuring the Value of Search Trails in Web Logs. In Proceedings of the 33rd international ACM SIGIR 
conference on Research and development in 
information retrieval  (pp. 587 –594).  
White, R., & Roth, R. (2009). Exploratory Search: Beyond 
the Query -Response Paradigm . Synthesis Lectures on 
Information Concepts, Retrieval, and Services  (Vol. 
1).