The Art of Mathematics Retrieval
Petr Sojka
Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University
Botanická 68a, 602 00 Brno, Czech Republic
sojka@ﬁ.muni.czMartin Líška
Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University
Botanická 68a, 602 00 Brno, Czech Republic
255768@mail.muni.cz
ABSTRACT
The design and architecture of MIaS (Math Indexer and Searcher), a
system for mathematics retrieval is presented, and design decisions
are discussed. We argue for an approach based on Presentation
MathML using a similarity of math subformulae. The system was
implemented as a math-aware search engine based on the state-of-
the-art system Apache Lucene.
Scalability issues were checked against more than 400,000 arXiv
documents with 158 million mathematical formulae. Almost three
billion MathML subformulae were indexed using a Solr-compatible
Lucene.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.7 [ Information Systems ]: Information storage and Retrieval—
Information Search and Retrieval ; I.7 [ Computing Methodolo-
gies]: Document and text Processing—Index Generation
General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Experimentation, Performance
Keywords
MIaS, WebMIaS, digital mathematics libraries, information systems,
math indexing and retrieval, mathematical content representation
There is no abstract art. You must always start with something. Afterward
you can remove all traces of reality.
Pablo Picasso1. INTRODUCTION
The solution to the problem of mathematical formulae retrieval
lies at the heart of building digital mathematical libraries (DML).
There have been numerous attempts to solve this problem, but none
have found widespread adoption within the wider mathematics com-
munity. And as yet, there is no widely accepted agreement on the
math search format to be used for mathematical formulae by library
systems or by Google Scholar.
MathML standard by W3C has become the standard for math-
ematics exchange between software tools. Almost no MathML is
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
DocEng2011, September 19–22, 2011, Mountain View, California, USA
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0863-2/11/09 ...$10.00.written directly by authors—they typically prefer a compact notation
of some T EX ﬂavour such as LATEX or AMSLATEX. The designer of a
search system for mathematics is thus faced with the task of convert-
ing data to a unifying format, and allowing DML users to use their
preferred notation when posing queries. [AMS]LATEX or similar T EX
macropackages are the typical preferences; Presentation MathML
or Content MathML are used only when available as outputs of a
software system.
During the integration of existing DMLs into larger projects such
as EuDML [9], the unsolved math search problem becomes evident—
DML without math search support is an oxymoron. We have evalu-
ated several systems for our goals: 1) MathDex1(formerly Math-
Find [6]); 2) EgoMath2developed by Josef Mišutka as an extension
of a full text websearch core engine Egothor [5]; 3) LATEXSearch3,
a search tool oered by Springer in SpringerLink; 4) LeActive-
Math4search, developed as part of the ActiveMath-EU project and
5)MathWebSearch5is an MSE developed in Bremen/Saarbrücken
by Kohlhase et al. [1] Our evaluation [7] has lead us to conclude that
there is no satisfactory, math-aware and scalable solution. For this
reason, we designed and implemented [3, 7] a newrobust solution
for retrieving mathematical formulae.
Section 2 presents our design of this scalable and extensible sys-
tem for searching mathematics, taking into account not only inherent
structure of mathematical formulae but also formula uniﬁcation and
subformulae similarity measures. Our evaluation of a prototypical
implementation on the Apache Lucene open source full-featured
search engine library is presented in Section 3. The paper concludes
with a description of the WebMIaS interface and listing future work
directions in Section 4 and with a summary in Section 5.
Art is never chaste. It ought to be forbidden to ignorant innocents, never
allowed into contact with those not suciently prepared. Yes, art is
dangerous. Where it is chaste, it is not art.
Pablo Picasso2. DESIGN OF MIAS
We have developed a math-aware, full-text based search engine
called MIaS (Math Indexer and Searcher). It processes documents
containing mathematical notation in MathML format. MIaS allows
users to search for mathematical formulae as well as the textual
content of documents.
Since mathematical expressions are highly structured and have no
canonical form, our system pre-processes formulae in several steps
to facilitate a greater possibility of matching two equal expressions
with dierent notation and/or non-equal, but similar formulae. With
1www.mathdex.com/
2egomath.projekty.ms.m.cuni.cz/egomath/
3www.latexsearch.com/
4devdemo.activemath.org/ActiveMath2/
5search.mathweb.org/index.xhtml
57an analogy to natural language searching, MIaS searches not only
for whole sentences (whole formulae), but also for single words and
phrases (subformulae down to single variables, symbols, constants,
etc.). For calculating the relevance of the matched expressions
to the user’s query, MIaS uses a heuristic weighting of indexed
mathematical terms, which accordingly aects scores of matched
documents and thus the order of results.
At the end of all processing methods, formulae are converted
from XML nodes to a linear string form, which can be handled by
the indexing core.
2.1 Math Indexing Workﬂow
The top-level indexing scheme with a detailed view of the mathe-
matical part is shown in Figure 1.
MIaS is currently able to index documents in XHTML, HTML
and TXT formats. As Figure 1 shows, the input document is ﬁrst
split into textual and mathematical parts. The textual content is
indexed in a conventional way, mathematics needs to be processed
dierently.
2.2 Math preprocessing
Mathematical expressions are pre-analyzed in several steps to
facilitate searches not only for exact whole formulae, but also for
subparts (tokenization) and for similar expressions (formulae uniﬁ-
cations). This addresses the issue of the static character of full-text
search engines and creates several representations of each input
formula, all of which are indexed.
Tokenization is a straightforward process of obtaining subfor-
mulae from an input formula. MIaS makes use of Presentation
MathML markup where all logical units are enclosed in XML tags
which makes obtaining all subformulae a question of tree traversal.
MIaS performs three types of uniﬁcation algorithms, the goal of
which is to create several more or less generalized representations
of all formulae obtained through the tokenization process. These
steps allow the system to return similar matches to the user query
while preserving the formula structure and -equality [5]:
1.Ordering—ordering of the operands of the commutative oper-
ations;
2.Variables uniﬁcation—substitution of all variables for uniﬁed
symbols (ids) while preserving bound variables;
3.Constants uniﬁcation—substitution of all number constants
for one uniﬁed symbol (const).
During the searching phase, a query can match several terms in
the index. However one match can be more important to the query
than another, and the system must consider this information when
scoring matched documents. Each indexed mathematical expression
has a weight (relevance score) assigned to it describing how far the
actual formula is from its original representation. It is computed
throughout the whole indexing phase by individual processing steps
following this basic rule of thumb—the more modiﬁed a formula
and the lower the level of a subformula, the less weight is assigned
to it.
It is impossible to assemble a weighting function that is exactly
right. Such a function needs to consider a document base on which
the system will run as well as the established customs in a particular
scientiﬁc ﬁeld. We tried to create a complex and robust weighting
function that would be appropriate to many ﬁelds.
At the end of the preprocessing phase, mathematical formulae are
transformed from XML nodes to a compacted string form so it can
be handled by a full-text indexing core.
An example of the formula preprocessing is displayed in Figure 2.2.3 Searching
In the search phase, user input is again split into mathematical
and textual parts. Formulae are then preprocessed in the same way
as in the indexing phase, except for tokenization—we doubt that
users would want to search for subparts of a queried expression
rather than the whole.
Art is the elimination of the unnecessary.
Pablo Picasso 3. EV ALUATION
For large scale evaluation, we needed an experimental implemen-
tation and a corpus of mathematical texts.
3.1 Implementation
The Math Indexer and Searcher is written in Java. The role of full-
text indexing and searching core is performed by Apache Lucene
3.1.0. The mathematical part of document processing can be seen
as a standalone pluggable extension to any full-text library, however
it needs custom integration for each one. In the case of Lucene, a
custom Tokenizer (MathTokenizer) has been implemented.
When searching for mathematical formulae, their weights need
to be considered in the ﬁnal score of the document. The scoring
function of our MIaS system adds one parameter to the Lucene’s
standard practical scoring function (described in detail at http:
//lucene.apache.org/java/3_1_0/api/all/org/apache/
lucene/search/Similarity.html )—weight wof one matched
formula:
score(q; d)=coord (q;d)·queryNorm(q)·
·∑︁
t in q(︁
tf(tind)·avg(w) ·idf(t)2·t:getBoost ()·norm(t;d))︁
(1)
If a document contains the same formula more than once (each
occurrence can have dierent weight assigned), the average value
of all the weights is taken into consideration (avg(w)).
3.2 Corpus of Mathematical Documents
A document corpus MREC (Mathematical REtrieval Corpus) with
439,423 scientiﬁc documents was used to evaluate the behavior of
the system we modelled. The documents come from the arXMLiv
project that is converting document sets from arXiv into XHTML +
MathML (both Content and Presentation) [8]. The resulting corpus
size was 124 GB uncompressed, 16 GB compressed. This corpus of
documents (MREC version 2011.4.439) is available for download
athttp://nlp.fi.muni.cz/projekty/eudml/MREC.
3.3 Results
Math Indexer and Searcher demonstrated the ability to index and
search a relatively vast corpus of real scientiﬁc documents. Its us-
ability is greatly improved thanks to its preprocessing functions
together with the formulae weighting model. The ability to search
for exact and similar formulae and subformulae, more so with cus-
tomizable relevance computation, demonstrates an unquestionable
contribution to the whole search experience.
It is very dicult, if not impossible, to completely verify the
correctness of the theoretical considerations made in the previous
sections and thus correctness of search results. For this purpose, a
suciently large corpus of documents with fully controlled content
would be needed. For any assembled query, there should exist be-
forehand a complete list of the documents ordered by their relevance
to the query to compare the actual results to. On the other hand,
the real world relevance of the results being returned needs to be
veriﬁed by an extensive user study and perhaps several parameters
need to be adjusted for the best results.
58input 
canonicalized 
documentdocument 
handler
text
searcher
input query
textterms
queryresultsindexindexer
unification
math processingtokenization
mathmath
searchingindexing
Lucene
math processing
ordering
tokenization
variables unification
constants unificationindexing
searchingweightingcanonicalization canonicalizationFigure 1: Scheme of the workﬂow of math processing
We have applied an empirical approach to the evaluation so far.
For these purposes we created a demo web interface, see Section 4.
3.4 Scalability Testing and Efﬁciency
We have devised a scalability test to see how the system behaves
with an increasing number of documents and formulae indexed.
Subsets containing 10,000, 50,000, 100,000 . . . and the complete
439,423 documents were gradually indexed and several values were
measured: the number of input formulae, the number of indexed
formulae, the indexing run-time and indexing CPU-time. Our ob-
servation showed that system scales linearly in proportion to the
number of documents.
The whole document set contained 158,106,118 formulae, after
all the preprocessing was done, our system indexed 2,910,314,146
expressions and the indexing run-time was 1,378 min (almost
23 hours) and the resulting index size was approx. 63 GB. We also
measured an average query time by querying the created index with
a set of dierently complex queries (mixed, non-mixed, more/less
complex single/multiple formulae). Resulting average query time
was 469 ms.
You don’t make art, you ﬁnd it.
Pablo Picasso
4. WEB INTERFACE AND FUTURE WORK
To allow user evaluation, we have created web interface for
MIaS—the WebMIaS system [4]—available at http://nlp.fi.
muni.cz/projekty/eudml/mias/ . WebMIaS allows the re-trieval of mathematical expressions written in T EX or MathML.
TEX queries are converted on-the-ﬂy into tree representations of
Presentation MathML, which is used for indexing. WebMIaS allows
complex queries composed of plain text and mathematical formulae.
It currently works over our complete mathematical corpus, MREC.
As the semantically same formulae can be represented by dier-
ent MathML notation, it is evident that some kind of normalization
of MathML is necessary. We use Canonical MathML [2] as normal-
ization MathML format and are using the software library UMCL
supporting it. Canonicalization (converting to a canonicalized form
of MathML) is used both during the indexing and querying phases.
It not only increases fairness of similarity ranking, but also helps
to match a query against the indexed form of MathML. We plan to
extend the eect of the commutative ordering part of the normal-
ization mentioned in 2.2 by arranging a full list of commutative
operators and all the operators with their priorities so the ordering
can be perfected.
Another area of long-term research planned is supporting Content
MathML, in a way similar to the current handling of Presentation
MathML. The architectural design is open to it, but as most of the
math available is in Presentation MathML taken from PDFs, this is
not currently a high priority.
Art is the lie that enables us to realize the truth.
Pablo Picasso5. CONCLUSIONS
We have presented an approach to mathematics searching and
indexing—the architecture and design of the MIaS system, and
59(a+b2+c,0.125)
(a+bc+2,0.125)(“mi” < “mn” ⇒ 2<­>c)
(a,0.0875)(+,0.0875)(bc+2,0.0875)
(b,0.06125) (c+2,0.06125)
(c,0.042875)
(+,0.042875)(2,0.042875)
(id1+2,0.0343)
(c+const,0.030625)
(id1+const,0.01715)(id1id2+2,0.07)
(bc+const,0.04375)
(id1id2+const,0.035)(id1+id2id3+2,0.1)
(a+bc+const,0.0625)
(id1+id2id3+const,0.05)input:
ordered:
tokenization:
variables
unification:
constants
unification:Figure 2: Example of formula preprocessing. Ordered pairs are (<expression written naturally>, <it’s weight>). All expressions as
shown are indexed, except for the original one.
its WebMIas interface. The feasibility of our approach has been
veriﬁed on large corpora of real mathematical papers from arXMLiv.
Scalability tests have conﬁrmed that the computing power needed
for ﬁne math similarity computations is readily available and allows
the use of this technology for projects on world-wide scale.
Acknowledgements. This work has been partially supported by
the Ministry of Education of CR within the Center of Basic Research
LC536 and by the European Union through its Competitiveness and
Innovation Programme (Policy Support Programme, ‘Open access
to scientiﬁc information”, Grant Agreement No. 250503). We thank
Michal R˚ uži ˇcka for help with ﬁgure drawings and web form of MIaS
interface.
Bad artists copy. Good artists steal.
Pablo Picasso
6. REFERENCES
[1] ¸ S. Anca. Natural Language and Mathematics Processing for
Applicable Theorem Search. Master’s thesis, Jacobs University,
Bremen, Aug. 2009.
https://svn.eecs.jacobs-university.de/svn/eecs/
archive/msc-2009/aanca.pdf .
[2] D. Archambault and V . Moço. Canonical MathML to Simplify
Conversion of MathML to Braille Mathematical Notations. In
K. Miesenberger, J. Klaus, W. Zagler, and A. Karshmer, editors,
Computers Helping People with Special Needs, volume 4061 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1191–1198.
Springer Berlin /Heidelberg, 2006.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/11788713_172.
[3] M. Líška. Vyhledávání v matematickém textu (in Slovak),
Searching Mathematical Texts, 2010. Bachelor Thesis, Masaryk
University, Brno, Faculty of Informatics (advisor: Petr Sojka),
https://is.muni.cz/th/255768/fi_b/?lang=en.[4] M. Líška, P. Sojka, M. R˚ uži ˇcka, and P. Mravec. Web Interface
and Collection for Mathematical Retrieval. In P. Sojka and
T. Bouche, editors, Proceedings of DML 2011, pages 77–84,
Bertinoro, Italy, July 2011. Masaryk University. http:
//www.fi.muni.cz/~sojka/dml-2011-program.html.
[5] J. Mišutka and L. Galamboš. Extending Full Text Search
Engine for Mathematical Content. In P. Sojka, editor,
Proceedings of DML 2008, pages 55–67, Birmingham, UK,
July 2008. Masaryk University.
http://dml.cz/dmlcz/702546.
[6] R. Munavalli and R. Miner. MathFind: A Math-Aware Search
Engine. In Proceedings of the 29th annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in information
retrieval, SIGIR ’06, pages 735–735, New York, NY , USA,
2006. ACM.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1148170.1148348.
[7]P. Sojka and M. Líška. Indexing and Searching Mathematics in
Digital Libraries – Architecture, Design and Scalability Issues.
In J. H. Davenport, W.M. Farmer, J. Urban and F. Rabe, editors,
Proceedings of CICM Conference 2011 (Calculemus/MKM),
volume 6824 of Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, LNAI,
pages 228–243, Berlin, Germany, July 2011. Springer-Verlag.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-22673-1_16.
[8] H. Stamerjohanns, M. Kohlhase, D. Ginev, C. David, and
B. Miller. Transforming Large Collections of Scientiﬁc
Publications to XML. Mathematics in Computer Science,
3:299–307, 2010.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11786-010-0024-7.
[9] W. Sylwestrzak, J. Borbinha, T. Bouche, A. Nowi ´nski, and
P. Sojka. EuDML—Towards the European Digital Mathematics
Library. In P. Sojka, editor, Proceedings of DML 2010, pages
11–24, Paris, France, July 2010. Masaryk University.
http://dml.cz/dmlcz/702569.
60