DIALOGUES  STANDPOINT
Speculating 
Spiritual 
Te c h nolog ie s
  Elizabeth Chin, ArtCenter College of Design
T
would such technologies do? What would they look like? 
How would they work?”
The Hands Up, Don’t Shoot Glove is one way I have 
explored this question. It also illustrates aspects of the 
ways in which spiritual practice, aesthetics, and power are 
part and parcel of technology and HCI. The glove’s palm 
incorporates a small camera that is connected to a Raspberry 
Pi, along with an accelerometer. When the wearer makes the 
“hands up” gesture, the device begins taking photographs 
and sends them to the Web.
In choosing to cover the glove in the elaborate beadwork 
typical of Vodou and Santeria ritual objects, my aim is to 
show that there is no inherent disjuncture between the 
Raspberry Pi and Afro-diasporic spirituality—they work 
together in the complex and urgent project of protecting 
Black life under current conditions. The 16 cowries on the 
glove reference the divination system used by many Santería 
practitioners, framing any encounter where the glove might 
be needed as unpredictable. The main image on the glove’s 
back is the double-headed ax wielded by the Santería deity 
Chango. Associated with the colors red and white, Chango 
is a king and the dispenser of justice. He is also associated 
with lightning, and by implication, electricity and related There is an old, old joke in Haiti that 80 percent of the 
population is Catholic, and 100 percent are Vodouyizan, or 
practitioners of Vodou. Part of the reality the joke exposes 
is that for Catholicism, practicing Vodou is anathema; for 
Vodouyizan, there is no conflict in being both Catholic 
and Vodou. On the surface, scientific inquiry in design and 
technology might seem antithetical to Vodou. Yet those who 
study and experience Vodou have documented widely that 
Vodouyizan are enthusiastic about technology, whether 
mailing cassettes of songs and instructions, making and 
distributing VHS tapes, or participating in WhatsApp 
calls [1]. This is also common among practitioners of other 
spiritual traditions such as Santería and Candomblé [2,3]. In 
the midst of a 21-day ceremony I attended in Haiti in 2018, 
the Vodou priest, mounted by Ogou, turned to me and told 
me to start video recording what was happening.
Part of my research and creative practice via my 
ongoing project the Laboratory of Speculative Ethnology 
involves creating speculative devices that reimagine 
current technologies using a framework of Afro-diasporic 
spiritualities with Afrofuturism. My work asks, “How might 
we craft technology that refuses to surveil and contain Black 
bodies, and is instead devoted to preserving Black life? What 
@INTERACTIONSMAG
60   INTERACTIONS   JULY–AUGUST 2022Endnotes
1. Boutros, A. Gods on the move: The mediatisation of Vodou. 
Culture and Religion 12 , 2 (2011), 185–201; https:/ /doi.org/10.108
0/14755610.2011.579718
2. Beliso-De Jesús, A. Electric Santería: Racial and Sexual Assemblages 
of Transnational Religion . Columbia Univ. Press, New York, 2015.
3. Richman, K.E Migration and Vodou . Reprint edition. Univ. Press of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL, 2018.
4. Benjamin, R. Race After Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the New 
Jim Code . 1st edition. Polity, Medford, MA, 2019.
5. Noble, S.U. Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce 
Racism . Illustrated edition. NYU Press, New York, 2018.
6. Chin, E. Bauhaus and the people without design history. In 
Bauhaus Futures . L. Forlano, M.W. Steenson, and M. Ananny, eds. 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2019, 85–94.
 Elizabeth Chin  is an anthropologist and ethnographer with a varied 
practice that has included performative scholarship, experimental 
writing, vernacular technology, and community-engaged work. A 
professor in the Media Design Practices MFA program at ArtCenter 
College of Design in Pasadena, she is currently editor-in-chief of 
American Anthropologist .
 →chin.elizabethj@gmail.comtechnologies. The glove’s background is beaded in a Haitian 
style, using silver and red. Here, the red represents Ogou, 
who is found throughout the Caribbean and is especially 
important in Haiti. He is a blacksmith and warrior whose 
realm is iron—railroads, cars, telephone wires, weapons. 
Chango and Ogou operate via the glove as warriors for 
justice, fierce protectors who persevere against impossible 
odds.
AI and tech more broadly have been shown to amplify 
problematic racial biases [4,5]. Leaning into the spiritual 
and aesthetic principles that have roots in Africa, among 
Indigenous peoples, and in Asia is a way to question the 
claims embedded in the universalist values that emerged 
in the areas of design and technology in the wake of World 
War II. There is little question that such universalism has 
not reached its lofty aims, in part because it is Eurocentric 
[6]. Futures in which technology acts in the interests of 
Blackness will include technologies that not only work 
differently; they will also look different and feel different. 
They will draw from Africa and its diaspora for both form 
and function, and their outcomes have yet to be imagined.
DOI: 10.1145/3542699  COPYRIGHT HELD BY AUTHORThe Hands Up, Don’t Shoot Glove.
Speculative glove.
 Vodou priest using a smartphone to document a room prepared for ritual.
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
JULY–AUGUST 2022   INTERACTIONS   61CLOCKWISE FROM TOP LEFT, PHOTOS BY: ELIZABETH CHIN; AN PAN; ZOË JACKSON