Towards Formal Security Analysis of Industrial Control
Systems
Marco Rocchetto
Security and Trust of Software Systems
University of Luxembourg
marco.rocchetto@uni.luNils Ole Tippenhauer
Information Systems Technology and Design
Singapore University of Technology and Design
nils_tippenhauer@sutd.edu.sg
ABSTRACT
We discuss the use of formal modeling to discover potential
attacks on Cyber-Physical systems, in particular Industrial
Control Systems. We propose a general approach to achieve
that goal considering physical-layer interactions, time and
state discretization of the physical process and logic, and
the use of suitable attacker proles. We then apply the ap-
proach to model a real-world water treatment testbed using
ASLan++ and analyze the resulting transition system using
CL-AtSe, identifying four attack classes.
To show that the attacks identied by our formal assess-
ment represent valid attacks, we compare them against prac-
tical attacks on the same system found independently by six
teams from industry and academia. We nd that 7 out of
the 8 practical attacks were also identied by our formal as-
sessment. We discuss limitations resulting from our chosen
level of abstraction, and a number of modeling shortcuts to
reduce the runtime of the analysis.
1. INTRODUCTION
A number of real-world examples (e.g., the ones reported
in [13]) have shown the paramount importance of improving
security in Cyber-Physical System (CPS). The exploitation
of security aws in CPS can potentially cause damage to na-
tions (e.g., the attack on Maroochy Shire Council's sewage
control system in Queensland, Australia, in 2000 [12]) or
even the entire world (e.g., Stuxnet [42]). A CPS contains
both physical and virtual components, therefore a number
of new attacks that combine the two aspects can be ex-
ploited by an attacker [12]. In addition, the attacker can
take advantage of the physical layer interactions with the
system and then a number of new attacker properties must
be taken into account (e.g., the distance between the at-
tacker and the system) during the analysis of the security of
CPS [31,39]. Therefore, the security assessment of CPS is a
challenging task, mainly due to the intrinsic complexity and
heterogeneity of such systems. On the one hand, this com-
plexity makes it dicult to eciently apply automated or
formal techniques for the security analysis of CPS [18,24,30].
On the other hand, the practical analysis of the security in
CPS might aect the availability of the system and the ex-
ploitation may even result in expensive damage to the CPS.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASIA CCS ’17, April 02 - 06, 2017, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
c2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4944-4/17/04. . . $15.00
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3052973.3053024We argue that a formal design-time security analysis of
CPS would largely increase the security of CPS, and that
a number of key elements for such an analysis have already
been proposed in the security research community. In par-
ticular, formal methods for security analysis of information
systems have recently been extended to cyber-physical sys-
tems in [23,30]. In addition, generalized attacker and system
models have been proposed in [9, 30, 39]. Together, those
methods could allow to detect logical aws in the system
design, that may be dicult to detect by empirical security
assessment [17]. One key component for such assessments is
a framework that allows to model the system and attacks in
sucient detail. Using that framework, potential vulnera-
bilities of the system can be identied, and countermeasures
can be validated. A standardized language for the denition
of a CPS system model has not been dened. A denition
of the system properties can be found in [12, 31] but it is
far from be exhaustive. Several properties of the system has
also been proposed as a result of the denition of a cyber-
physical attacker, e.g., [32, 39]. However, to the best of our
knowledge, there is still no general description of the proper-
ties that has to be considered when dening a system model
of a CPS.
In this work, we bring together formal methods and at-
tacker models proposed for cyber-physical systems, and use
them to perform a comprehensive security assessment of a
real-world water treatment testbed. We validate the results
of our assessment by comparing it to attacks proposed in
related work, and results from practical assessment [2].
While the denition of attacks, attackers, and system model
should be a fairly standard procedure for the formal analysis
of systems, the comparison between theoretical and practical
results is often omitted in formal approaches. This analysis
can be used to emphasize the importance of a design-time
security analysis showing what it can prevent.
We summarize our main contribution as follows.
1. We propose an extensive system model of a real-world
water treatment testbed (SWaT), that considers both
network and physical layer interactions. Our model
has been dened by following the description of the
system dened during the design phase.
2. We categorize the possible attacks on SWaT, general-
izing our results for water treatment plants.
3. We consider dierent attacker proles and we show
how our analysis results changes with respect to dif-
ferent proles.
4. We provide a comparison between the attacks found
by our formal analysis tool and the results of practical
assessments performed by six teams from industry and
academia.
114Structure. In Section 2, we briey introduce the back-
ground. We dene how to model a CPS and attackers for
CPS in Section 3. In Section 4, we introduce a practical
use case, show how to model it, and present the results of
our formal assessment. In Section 5, we compare our formal
assessment results with ndings from practical assessment
on the modeled system. Related work is summarized in Sec-
tion 6, and the paper is concluded in Section 7.
2. BACKGROUND
This work leverages related work from two publications:
an attacker model framework proposed in [31], and an exten-
sion of the Dolev-Yao (DY) attacker model [16] with physi-
cal interactions proposed in [30]. We combine the two ideas
and dene how to formally validate a water treatment plant
against dierent types of attackers (referred to as attacker
proles in [31]). In the remainder of this section, we provide
more details on those two works, and introduce the formal
specication language we use (ASLan++).
2.1 Attacker Model Framework
In [31], the authors dene a taxonomy that they apply
to review related work on attacker models for the security
analysis of CPS. They use the results to dene the main
concepts behind the formal security analysis of such sys-
tems and then they propose a framework (implemented in a
tool they called APE [28]) to encompass commonly used at-
tacker models. We rst present their terminology (relevant
for our work) and then we use those denitions to informally
describe their attacker model framework.
Terminology. ASystem under attack is an interacting or
connected group (soft- and hardware, humans) forming a
unied whole and serving a common purpose.
AnAttacker is a group of human actors that collaborate
to achieve a goal related to the system under attack.
AnAttacker Prole describes templates or classes of at-
tackers. These proles are a generic description of the set-
ting and intuition, and not an exhaustive listing of possible
actions, motivations, or capabilities of the attacker.
AnAttacker Model (together with compatible system mod-
els) ideally fully characterizes the possible interactions be-
tween the attacker and the system under attack. In particu-
lar, the model denes constraints for the attacker (e.g. nite
computational resources, no access to shared keys)
ASystem Model characterizes relevant components of the
system under attack, to a level of detail that allows to deter-
mine all possible interaction of the attacker with the system.
We will not go into the details of the system model since our
work focuses on the attacker. Therefore, we will not distin-
guish between system models that consider risks and threats
linked to components of the system, and those that do not.
AnAttack Model characterizes all potential interactions
between the attacker and a specic conguration of the sys-
tem under attack and the specication of the goal that the
attacker wants to achieve with respect to the system under
attack. One can consider an attack model as an instantia-
tion of the attacker model on a specic scenario (i.e., system
conguration).
Attacker Model Framework. The attacker model frame-
work is dened as an hierarchy of dimensions . Each dimen-
sions denes a relevant aspect for modeling the attacker for
CPS, e.g., the distance between the attacker and the CPS.
Ametric is associated to each dimensions and, when the
dimensions are instantiated, the framework produces an at-
tacker prole . An attacker prole is then an instantiation
of the set of dimensions dened by the attacker framework.
We discuss the details of the dimensions and metrics in Sec-
tion 3.2 when we dene a mapping between attacker prole
and attack model.
Attacker
Framework
Profile 1System
Framework
Attack modelProfile 2 Profile 3 System AAbstractionFigure 1: The extension of the Attacker Model
Framework. The dotted lines are the ones formal-
ized in this work.
As depicted in Figure 1, the attacker model framework
can produce a variety of dierent attacker proles. In [31],
the authors dene six attacker prole archetypes. Those
archetypes capture common intuitions behind the related
work they reviewed. Due to lack of space we cannot go into
the details of those archetypes but we report their informal
denitions.
ABasic User is someone who uses already established and
potentially automated techniques to attack a system. This
attacker has average access to hardware, software, and In-
ternet connectivity, similar to what an individual can obtain
through purchase with personal funds or by theft from an
employer.
AnInsider , which for example can be disgruntled employ-
ees or a social engineering victim. The employment position
or the system privileges he owns (e.g., user, supervisor, ad-
ministrator) are tightly related to the damage he can cause
to the target.
Hacktivist. A portmanteau word which combines hacker
and activist, as dened in [14]. This class of attackers uses
their hacking abilities to promote a political agenda.
Terrorist , also known as cyber-terrorist. Is a politically
motivated attacker who uses computers and information tech-
nology in general to cause severe disruption or widespread
fear.
Cybercriminal, sometimes generally called black hat hacker
or structured hacker. An attacker with extensive security
knowledge and skills. This category of attackers takes ad-
vantage of known vulnerabilities, and potentially has the
knowledge and intention of nding new zero-day vulnerabil-
ities.
Nation-State, an attacker sponsored by a nation/state.
Possibly belonging to (or that used to belong to) a state
organization for carrying out oensive cyber operations.
2.2 Cyber-Physical Dolev-Yao
In [30], the authors dene an extension of the DY attacker
model, called Cyber-Physical Dolev-Yao (CPDY). Before
going into the details of this extension we briey introduce
the DY attacker model.
The Dolev-Yao Model. The DY attacker model [16] is
a de-facto standard for the formal analysis in the commu-
nication security domain. As such, the attacker model is
commonly used for the identication of cyber-related at-
tacks, mostly in security protocols (e.g., [4]). It also has been
used for other systems, e.g., Web applications and Service-
Oriented architectures as proposed in [3,27]. Attacker mod-
els  a la DY have been proposed [32, 36] to reason on CPS.
In this work, we consider the standard DY [16] model of an
active attacker who controls the network but cannot break
cryptography.
Cyber-Physical extension. The extension (leveraging
Horn logic rules) allows the standard DY to perform physical-
layer interaction with the system. The authors motivate the
extension by showing (on a small CPS model) that the stan-
dard DY model is not enough for modeling attackers in a
115cyber-physical context. The CPDY extension is dened by
two main sets of rules:
Rules that represent physical-layer interaction in the
system, e.g., to dene that a valve can be manually
operated.
Rules that represent physical-layer capabilities of the
attacker, e.g., to dene that if an attacker has physical
access to the CPS he can damage a component of the
CPS.
We do not go into the details of the rules in this section since
we will present our modeling technique in Section 3.
One obvious drawback of this extension is that the de-
nition of the laws of physics related to the various processes
in a CPS might not be straightforward. We discuss this in
more details later in Section 3.
2.3 Formal Speciﬁcation Language
We now dene the terminology related to the system model
specication that we use in the remainder of this paper.
We use a terminology that resembles the one used in the
ASLan++ language but we only informally describe the se-
mantics of the terminology (the formal denition is reported
in [7]). In our notation, a system model is formally repre-
sented by the following main concepts.
Entities, Agents and Roles. Anentity in a system model
represents a component of the system (i.e., of the CPS).
Specically, an entity describes both the behavior of the
components and the communication with other entities. As
an example, the behavior of a PLC is dened by its logic
and it usually involves the interaction between the PLC and
other entities in the CPS. An entity can also be considered
as a set of components. In this case, the entities that have
been grouped together are called sub-entities. An agent of
the system model can play the roleof a specic entity. There
are two types of agent: honest and dishonest. When an hon-
estagent plays the role of an entity, he behaves according
to the behavior of the entity. A dishonest agent represents
the attacker and then (depending on the attacker prole de-
scribed later in this section) he can diverge from the honest
behavior of the entity. For example, he can inject malicious
payloads in the communication with other entities.
Communication and Channels. The network communi-
cation between dierent entities occur on a network chan-
nelcan be signed, encrypted, or both (i.e., secure). An at-
tacker model  a la Dolev-Yao [16] is assumed, therefore, if the
channel is unencrypted the attacker is able to read the mes-
sages exchanged through that channel. When the messages
are not signed nor encrypted the attacker is able to modify
the messages. In CPS, we also need to consider the analog
communication and physical layer interactions between en-
tities. For example, a sensor can communicate through an
analog channel with a PLC. With the level of abstraction
we have considered in this paper we do not take into ac-
count the implementation details of the dierent protocols
involved in the analog or network communication. However,
if a modeler considers an attacker who can read the analog
communication then he has to explicitly model the message
exchange between entities in the system model. Otherwise,
he can group all the entities together and model the internal
behavior without the need of specifying the internal commu-
nication.
Semantics and Transition System. Once a system model
is specied in ASLan++, a translation (automatically per-
formed by a tool) must be performed to generate a tran-
sition system (dened in the ASLan formal language [40]).
The transition system can be used as input for the tools
that performs the formal security analysis. The semantics
of the ASLan++ model is then expressed as a transition
Figure 2: Graphical representation of the process of
modeling and analyzing CPS. The dimensions of the
attacker model are discussed in detail in [31].
system where the initial status of each entity is described by
a predicate over all the variables used for the denition of
the behavior of the entity itself. The transitions represents
variation to the variables of the entities or on the knowledge
of the attacker. The attacker knowledge is represented by a
predicate as for any other entity. The nal state (goal state)
represents the goal that the attacker wants to achieve. We
describe the goals later in Section 3 and Section 4.
3. TOOL-ASSISTED ASSESSMENT
The overall assessment process proposed is summarized
in Figure 2. Following the structure of that gure, we now
provide more details on system model, attacker model and
goals. We conclude this section with a discussion of limita-
tions of the proposed design choices.
3.1 System Model
As dened in Section 2.1, the system model is an abstrac-
tion of the system under attack and denes all the possible
interactions of the attacker with the system. Therefore, the
rst step for the denition of a general system modeling
technique for any CPS is the identication of the relevant
aspects and components of the system. There are a num-
ber of dierent work in the literature for the denition of a
system model for CPS, e.g., [15]. However, the problem has
been often studies from an engineering point of view, with
no (or little) attention for the security aspects [12].
We consider the following as main aspects of a CPS:
1. The components involved in the CPS and their behav-
ior (e.g., dened by their logic)
2. The digital communication between the components
3. The physical interactions between components, par-
tially dened by the related laws of physics
We now comment on the modeling of each in more detail.
3.1.1 Modeling of Components
Physical Status of the System. When modeling the sta-
tus of a CPS, we have to consider the physical status of the
components involved in the physical process. In order to
consider the physical process we use a database that stores
the status of all the components of the system. For exam-
ple, the level of water in each tank or the level of chemicals
inside the water. The term database in this context does
not refer to standard DBMS (DataBase Management Sys-
tems), as ASLan++ (and other formal languages) cannot
communicate with DBMS. Instead, it is possible to dene
astatus set (using predicates) of tuples that uniquely de-
nes the actual status of a property of a component in the
CPS. In ASLan++ it is also possible to dene the set as
non-public, which means that the attacker cannot read or
arbitrarily write the status of the database.
116Physical Properties of Components. In a CPS, each
component can have a number of physical properties which
are stored in the status set. Those properties might also de-
termine how an agent (e.g., the attacker) can interact with
them. The properties of a component can take values from
a continuous interval but, in our formalization, we have dis-
cretized these values into several symbolic constants. For
example, when a sensor reads the level of the water inside a
tank and reports them to a controller, we assume that the
readings can only range in a (nite, ordered) set of symbolic
constants.
As an example, we consider the valves in SWaT. There are
two dierent type of valves: motorized valves and manual
valves. The main dierence is that a motorized valve can be
operated remotely and manually, while a manual valve can
only be manually operated. Therefore, an Insider attacker
can potentially operate any type of valve while an attacker
without physical access to the CPS cannot. In order to
connect the physical properties of the system model to the
interaction of the attacker model we have used Horn Clauses
(HC) in our ASLan++ models, and other specic settings
described in Section 4.2. An example of HC for the denition
of a manual operation of a manual valve is the following.
systemStatus (Component ;open) : 
attackerProp (distance ;physicalAccess )^
systemStatus (Component ;close )^
systemStatus (Component ;manual )
where the status of the component Component can be changed
in the systemStatus database if Component can be manually
operated.
Control Logic of the Components. The logic of indus-
trial control system components is commonly dened by the
programming of the respective PLCs and the SCADA. Such
logic is usually written in languages such as ladder logic fol-
lowing the IEC 61131-3 standard [22], and represents simple
state machines and similar. It should therefore be possible
to model the behavior of components faithfully in languages
such as ASLan++. We provide an example of such a mod-
eling in our use case in Section 4.
3.1.2 Digital Communications
The model of the network is not new to the formal meth-
ods community. There are, in fact, a number of works that
model the network (e.g., as channels where dierent agents
are communicating with each others) and protocols over the
network (e.g., [11, 40]). However, the parties communicat-
ing in a CPS and the protocols used in the communication
might be dierent from the ones considered in security pro-
tocols or in the standard client-server paradigm, see for ex-
ample [8,39]. In our case, we use the DY model and then we
focus on the payloads communicated by the various compo-
nents more than on the structure of the messages.
3.1.3 Physical Interactions between Components
The denition of the laws of physics related to a CPS is
not a trivial task. There are however preliminary results
in the direction of the automated denition of such laws,
e.g., [34]. The denition of a general tool for the extraction
of the laws of physics from a CPS is out of the scope of this
paper. However, we illustrate the main laws of physics we
consider in our examples, and the relations between them,
the system, and the attacker model.
The physical interactions between components expresses
the constraints that needs to be fullled whenever a modi-
cation of the physical part of the system take place. For
example, if two water tanks are connected by a pipe, when
the water level of one of the tanks is decreasing, the wa-
ter level of the other tank needs to increase. In our modelswe capture linear physical interactions between components
but nothing prevents a modeler to consider non-linear inter-
actions (subject to the granularity of the discretization of
values). As we show in the Section 4, a modeler can use sets
or a database to store those information.
We propose to model the behavior of each component in
terms of input/output messages, and modication of the
physical status of the CPS (i.e., of the status set). The
ASLan++ language (as other formal languages) provides
an AnB (Alice and Bob) notation for the denition of the
message exchange between entities. For example, a sen-
sorSthat sends a message Mto a PLC Pis dened in
ASLan++ as: S!P:M. This construct is then auto-
matically translated into a transition system where the ex-
change of message is dened as modication of variables in
state predicates (the details of the semantics of ASLan++
can be found in [6]). Furthermore, the communication of
components and the PLCs is not direct but passes through
sensors and actuators. For example, a tank itself typically
does not communicate directly with the PLC. Instead, a
sensor (e.g., Level Indicator Transmitter or LIT) reads the
level of the water and communicate the readings to the PLC.
The same applies to motorized valves or pumps|the status
of those components is read by sensors and changed by actu-
ators controlled by a PLC. In our use case, examples of such
sensors/actuators are: Flow, Pressure, and Level Indicator
Transmitters.
Neighboring components may aect the behavior of a com-
ponent C. Thus, with higher number of aecting neighbors,
the complexity of the denition of the behavior of Cin-
creases. In order to avoid state explosion problems, we have
limited the expressiveness of the behavior of the components
in our use case in Section 4 by considering only a subset of
the related components.
3.2 Attacker Proﬁle and Attack Model
Mapping an attacker proles to an attack model can (in
general) be achieved by mapping each instantiation of each
dimension (metric) of an attacker prole to a constraint for
the attack model. The attack model is, by denition, com-
posed by an attacker prole and a system model. Therefore,
a constraint in the attack model results in a constraint on
the interaction between the attacker and the system.
In general, the attacker framework proposed in [31] can be
applied to several security techniques, e.g. from risk analysis
to model checking. However, in this work we focus on model-
checking based techniques. In this context, a system model
is often dened by a transition system (e.g., the semantics
of the ASLan++ formal language [7]) which can potentially
dene a tree with an innite number of paths. Constraints
over the system will then be expressed as constraints on the
exploration of this tree.
The structure of the attacker model is composed by three
main independent dimensions: knowledge, resources, and
psychology (see Figure 2). Each dimension is structured
with an hierarchy of sub-dimensions. In this work, we omit
the details of the dimensions and focus on the mapping
between those dimensions and an attack model (see Sec-
tion 4.2).
3.3 Security Goals
We dene a security goal as a malicious state of the system
or in terms of knowledge of the attacker model (i.e., con-
dentiality violation). Due to the heterogeneous nature of
CPS, dening general security goals means dening goals in
an abstract way (and with a high level of abstraction). The
denition of such categorization is out of the scope of this
work since we aim at dening goals that can concretely be
applied to a CPS. Nevertheless, commonalities should exist:
for example, all water treatment plants have similar logic to
117control the process of physical components. Therefore, we
can categorize the security goals for a water treatment plant
as follows:
1. Over/Under-ow tanks
2. Arbitrarily change the status of a component (open/-
close a motorized valve)
3. Alter chemical dosing of the water
4. Drop/Increase the pressure in a pipe
5. Drop/Increase the ow of the water in a pipe
In Section 4.3, we show our coverage and examples of attacks
found on SWaT.
3.4 Limitations
3.4.1 Discretization of Time and States
In our work we focus on discrete-time analysis. This
simplies the analysis and permits us to use a wide range
of security analysis tools (e.g., CL-AtSe [37], OFMC [10],
SATMC [5]).
In our specic application scenario (water treatment plants),
we found that the system's inertia leads to time constraints
that are not as strict as in other CPS, e.g., power plants. As
a result, the water level in a tank can be easily discretized by
considering threshold values measured at discrete time steps.
In particular, such discretization of values and times is also
fundamentally used for the digital control of the system used
by the PLCs. Our intuition is that the discretization chosen
by the system engineers to guarantee stable operations of
the system will also be suitable for our formal modeling of
the system. This will also allow us to directly translate the
control logic implemented in the PLCs to our system model.
We acknowledge that by using a discrete time we are lim-
iting the expressiveness of the system. To validate that we
are not missing important attacks in our analysis, we will
compare our formal analysis results with the results of inde-
pendent manual testing in Section 5, and the related work
in Section 6.
3.4.2 Abstraction Level and Laws of Physics
The level of abstraction is always a concern when it comes
to the denition of a system model. When considering CPS
this is particularly delicate because the processes in a CPS
can be modeled only along with the laws of physics related
to that process. In addition, selected attacks in a CPS model
might be possible only if specic laws of physics have been
considered. As an example, to increase the pressure in a
tank, the direct proportionality between temperature and
pressure should be considered. An attacker with physical
access to the CPS could increase the temperature of the
tank and generate enough pressure to make the tank burst.
A low level of abstraction (high level of details) would be
then preferable in case of CPS. On the other hand, when
considering model checking techniques, considering a high
level of details might easily lead to non-termination issues.
4. USE CASE: SWaT
We have applied our technique to a real-world water treat-
ment plant, SWaT (see Figure 3, with general description
in [25]). SWaT is an operational ICS, built for the experi-
mental research in the design of secure ICS. As depicted in
Figure 4, the HMI, the SCADA, and the Historian are con-
nected to the PLCs of the six physical processes of SWaT.
Each physical process has a specic task, and is connected to
one or more other physical processes (more details in [25]).
A number of manual valves, pressure meters, and ow
meters are involved in SWaT, for the sake of simplicity we
only discuss the main components involved in each process.
Figure 3: Our formal model is based on the water
treatment plant SWaT.
A more detailed overview of the system is provided in Ap-
pendix 7. Each component (e.g., sensors, pumps) is asso-
ciated to one specic PLC, but any PLC can request to
communicate to any other component (through the PLC
connected to that component). An access control table is
stored in each PLC and determines whether or not another
PLC (which is not directly connected to the component) is
allowed to perform any request to the components it con-
trols. In our analysis, we assume that any PLC can commu-
nicate with any component according to the implementation
of SWaT.
Resulting model. The attack model that we have imple-
mented in ASLan++ is around 1000 lines long and contains
more than 50 entities (4 in P1, 12 in P2, 8 in P3, 8 in P4, 14
in P5, 7 in P6) where: 11 are pumps, 16 motorized valves,
6 PLC, 9 tanks, 9 AIT, 8 FIT, and 1 PIT. The ASLan++
specication (available at [29]) generates 269 ASLan rules
(i.e., transition rules). Due to the complexity of the speci-
cation, CL-AtSe (the security analysis tool we have used)
takes up to one day for the analysis of several security goals
(assuming that the goal can be reached). In order to speed
up the analysis, for each security goal, we have (manually)
reduced the attack model considering only a subset of the
processes that are related to the security goal. For example,
when the goal involves the level of the water in the tank in
the rst process, we have considered only the rst, second,
and third process. In this way, we have reduced the state
space and accelerated the analysis procedure to few seconds.
4.1 Modeling the SWaT Processes
We now dene how to model each component involved
in the SWaT process. We have used the ASLan++ formal
language [40] for modeling SWaT. For the sake of readability
and generality, we do not give the details of the ASLan++
model (which we made publicly available at [29]). Instead,
we describe the general concepts behind the modeling.
Databases. As discussed in Section 3.1, we use a non-public
database to store the physical state of the system.
Using the same concept we also create an Historian set
which represents the Historian component. This can be used
in LTL security goals in order to understand if the attacker
modied the Historian. We discuss the goal later on in this
section.
Network and Message Exchange. Dierent network
protocols are involved in the SWaT testbed. We have, how-
ever, considered an abstraction of the payloads communi-
cated and we have abstracted away all the details related to
the specic protocols involved (e.g., Ethernet/IP [20] or the
Common Industrial Protocol [33]). The formal analysis of
the security protocols involved in SWaT is out of the scope
of this work.
118Sensor
42.42Sensor
42.42
T101 T301 T401UFL1 Network
MV
101
MV
201MV
302P101P301 P401UVSensor
42.42
PLC 1
Sensor
42.42Sensor
42.42Sensor
42.42
PLC 2
 PLC 3
Sensor
42.42
PLC 4
RO
PLC 5
P501Sensor
42.42
T601
Sensor
42.42
T602MV
503MV
501
MV
502HMI
HMI
SwitchSCADA Historian
HMI
PLC 6Figure 4: A simplied version of the SWaT process represented in our system model. In addition the
components show, our formalized model contains details such as manual valves. The HMI, SCADA, UV and
RO components are not fully represented in our system model for eciency reasons.
Logic of the PLCs and SCADA. As proposed in Sec-
tion 3.1, we dened the logic of the PLC by using the op-
erating manual of SWaT. We note that while it should be
theoretically possible to prove equivalence of the logic in
SWaT and our model, our level of abstraction with respect
to ASLan++ makes it dicult to provide a soundness proof
between the two.
With respect to logic running in the SCADA system, we
do not distinguish between the communication between the
SCADA or the PLC and the various components because we
abstract away the details of the protocols involved. There-
fore, considering the SCADA entity would replicate the logic
already dened in the PLCs. It might be interesting con-
sider the SCADA system because it widens the attack sur-
face, however, the complexity of the attacks remains the
same since the logic of the PLC already expresses the con-
trol logic.
Example: Modeling of PLC1 and T101. As an exam-
ple, we show and describe here (a part of) the model of the
interactions between PCL1 and the tank T101 (where *is
used as a wildcard).
PLC1 is constantly waiting for incoming communications
by LIT101 (and LIT301, that we do not discuss for the sake
of simplicity) and, based on the incoming values PLC1 de-
cides how to proceed. Therefore, we have modeled the be-
havior of PLC1 as a switch-case over the incoming commu-
nication inside a while loop. The number of iterations of
the while loop is set before the execution of CL-AtSe and
variate depending on the goal. The number of iterations
usually ranges between 2 to 10 since most of the attacks can
be found with a low number of iterations and the analysis
can take up to a day when 10 is chosen.
while(true){
switch{
%low (500mm)
case(lit101 -> plc1: low):{
Actor -> mv101: open;
}
%high (800mm)
case(lit101 -> plc1: high):{
plc1 -> mv101: close;
}
%highhigh (1200mm)
case(lit101 -> plc1: highhigh):{
systemStatus.remove((alarm,*));
systemStatus.add((alarm,on));
}%lowlow (250mm)
case(lit101 -> plc1: lowlow):{
plc1 -> mv101: open;
plc1 -> p101: stop;
systemStatus.remove((alarm,*));
systemStatus.add((alarm,on));
}
Example: Modeling of physical laws in T301.
In Section 3.1, we discussed the modeling of physical be-
havior of components based on physical laws. We now pro-
vide an example how this modeling was done in our use
case. For the denition of the physical behavior of a com-
ponent Cwe have considered the neighboring components
that can aect the component C. As an example, consider
the level of water inside tank T301 in process 3 (Figure 4) as
a deterministic value. If the initial level is above an upper
threshold, it will decrease if, e.g., the pump P101 is o, the
motorized valve MV201 is closed, and the pump P301 is on.
if(
(systemStatus((mv201,close)) |
systemStatus((p101,off))) &
systemStatus((p301,on))
){
if(systemStatus((t301,Status))){
systemStatus.remove((t301,Status));
switch{
case(Status = aboveThreshold){
systemStatus.add((t301,highhigh));
lit301 -> plc3: highhigh;}
case(Status = highhigh){
systemStatus.add((t301,high));
lit301 -> plc3: high;}
[...]
4.2 Modeling the Attacker
In this section, we describe our mapping between the
dierent dimensions of the attacker prole and the attack
model.
4.2.1 Attacker Proﬁle
We consider two dierent attacker proles: Insider and
Cybercriminal. The denition of the two attacker proles
is given in Table 1 where the dimension instantiations re-
ported reect the descriptions in Section 2.1 and the de-
nitions in [31]. In Table 1, we show a comparison between
119Table 1: Comparison of attacker proles in use case
Prole
S
ystem
S
ource Code
Di
stance
S
trategy
Det
ermination
Ca
mouage
A
im
I
nsider       physical
Cybercriminal # # #    virtual
Th
e metric associated do the dimensions is [  <#].
the two proles, using [ #< ] as a metric associated to the
dimensions. For example, the symbol  (and#) applied to
the distance dimension indicate having physical access to
the CPS respectively (or not having access, respectively).
Insider. An Insider (e.g., a disgruntled employee) has phys-
ical access to the CPS. To model the high knowledge of the
system we give to the attacker model the private keys of
each entity. We have also performed experiments with the
attacker playing the role of one or more entities in the sys-
tem model. The main objective of this attacker prole is to
attack the physical system.
Cybercriminal. This attacker prole is very well repre-
sented by the Dolev-Yao attacker model. The low knowledge
of the system is reected in no privileges, e.g., no private
keys. The main objective of this attacker prole is to attack
the virtual part of the system.
4.2.2 Dimensions
We have considered a subset of the dimensions dened
in [31], since not all of the dimensions can be applied in our
context (i.e., mapped into our system model).
System Knowledge. The initial knowledge of the at-
tacker can be ne-tuned in formal languages. Specically,
in ASLan++, we dene the attacker knowledge in terms of:
Knowledge of messages exchanged.
Encryption/decryption keys known by the attacker.
Access to the status databases.
Knowledge of the behavior of the entities of the CPS.
In security protocol analysis the knowledge of the mes-
sages exchanged between entities is a fairly standard con-
straint. When considering a CPS the messages might be ex-
changed on dierent network levels. For example, in SWaT,
the messages exchanged between sensors and PLCs are in a
dierent network with respect the ones exchanged between
PLCs and the SCADA. In our system model, we group to-
gether dierent entities when they communicate on a net-
work level non accessible to the attacker. We dene an up-
per entity grouping together all those sub-entities and we
hide from the attacker the internal communications. There-
fore, only the communication between the upper-entities can
be seen by the attacker. However, by giving/removing to
the attacker knowledge encryption and decryption keys, it
is possible to grant/restrict the attacker to a sub-part of
the network of the CPS. Similarly, by giving access to the
status database we can determine whether or not the at-
tacker knows the current physical status of the system (e.g.,
to dierentiate between Insider and Cybercriminal proles).
Another feature of the ASLan++ language is that we can
dene that the attacker plays the role of one of the enti-
ties/components of the CPS. In this way we can consider
scenarios in which the entity has been compromised by the
attacker (assumption that we have considered during the S3
event).Distance. Having physical access to the CPS is a great
advantage of any Insider attacker. As we show later in Sec-
tion 5, it is easier to perform an attack if the attacker has
physical access to the CPS. In our system model, we can
set the distance of the attacker by enabling/disabling his
physical access to the CPS. By enabling physical access the
attacker can manually operate the components of the SWaT
testbed. For example, the attacker can manually open/close
motorized and manual valves. While motorized valves can
also be remotely operated, the manual valves are only part
of the attack surface of the system model when in presence
of an Insider attacker. We have modeled the distance con-
straints using Horn Clauses.
For each component of the SWaT system model we have
also dened a constraint stating if it can be manually op-
erated or not. Based on this and other properties of each
component, a set of Horn Clauses determine the eect of
manually operating a specic component, for example, the
change of the state of that component in the status database.
Source Code Knowledge. In ASLan++ the attacker can
play the role of any entity of the CPS, as if an attacker knew
the source code running on that entity. In order, to allow
the attacker to play the role of an entity, the modeler needs
to take into account the feasibility of such constraint. For
example, in SWaT, only when an attacker has access to the
Studio5000 [35] software he can modify the logic of the PLC.
Therefore, when the attacker is playing the role of the PLC,
we implicitly assume that he has access to Studio5000.
Strategy and Determination. The strategy and deter-
mination dimensions express the type of analysis that the
attacker wants to perform. This dimension is hard-coded in
the formal analysis tools we have used (i.e., CL-AtSe [37])
and we could not change it. However, the analysis tool gives
the user the possibility to tune the parameter used during
the analysis. For example, the number of time each ASLan
rule can be used or the number of iteration of each cycle
(that is related to the number of actions each entity can
perform). Leveraging those options we have been able to
express dierent strategies and determinations.
Aim and Camouage. We express the aim of the at-
tacker as part of the security goals that the attacker wants
to achieve. A security goal in ASLan++ can be expressed
as a state or as an LTL (Linear Temporal Logic) property
of the system model. Both type of security goals express an
undesirable state of the system. For example, one can check
that whenever a tank has been lled up then the water stops
owing inside the tank.
The stealthiness of an attack performed to achieve a secu-
rity goal can be expressed by using the alarms of the system
model. In SWaT, alarms can be triggered by the PLC and
we use them to ne tune the stealthiness of the attacker
prole considered in the analysis. For example, with the fol-
lowing LTL goal we express that we always want the system
status database not to contain a level of the water (inside a
tank) above a threshold without any alarm raised. The term
always in the previous sentence refers to the LTL global op-
erator (i.e.,2). The operator expresses that the goal has to
hold in every state reached by the security analysis tool.
2:(systemStatus (tank ;aboveThreshold )^
systemStatus (alarm ;o))
4.3 Impact of Attacker Proﬁles on SWaT
Security Goals. We have found a number of attacks to
security goals with our attack model. CL-AtSe reports an
attack trace as a message sequence chart for each attack
found. We report an overview of the attacks found in Ta-
ble 2. The complexity of such attacks (i.e., the time needed
120Table 2: Categorization of attacks found using the formal assessment approach
Security Goal Components aected/involved Processes
Overow Tank all tanks All
Empty Tank all tanks All
Changing Status Component all pumps Subset
Alter Chemical Dosing P201, P202, P203, LIT201, LIT202, LIT203 Subset
Pressure Drop/Increase PIT501 Subset
Flow Drop/Increase all FIT Subset
for the analysis of the security goal) mainly depend on the
initial status of the system model and the attacker prole
considered. To give an example, if the attack is to empty a
tank and the system has just started lling up the water in
the tank, a Cybercriminal waits until the water in the tank
reaches a level such that the system starts emptying the tank
to perform the attack. This is due to the fact that the at-
tacker cannot manually manipulate the valves and then he
cannot easily modify the status of the system. In Table 3
we have then reported the details of the attacks we have
found with our technique. Specically, we report the time
of the security verication, the components involved in the
attack, which attacker prole performed the attack, and the
processed taken into account in the attack model. We now
go into the details of the dierent attacks on security goals.
Tank Water Level. The rst set of attacks we describe are
the ones related to the level of the water inside a tank. We
have considered over/under-ow of tanks with and without
physical interactions from the attacker. Both the Cyber-
criminal and the Insider attacker can perform this type of
attack on every tank, but we have considered dierent con-
straints related to the attacker prole (e.g., by requiring the
stealthiness of the attacks). As an example, we consider the
security constraint that the level of the water in the tank
T101 (in the rst process of SWaT, see Figure 4) needs to
stay below a certain threshold as follows to avoid overows:
2:(systemStatus (t101 ;aboveThreshold )
When we run our analysis against a cybercriminal at-
tacker, CL-AtSe returns the following attack trace (all the
traces of this section are slightly simplied for the sake of
clarity).
plc1 -> lit101 : statusRequest
lit101 -> i(plc1): optimal
plc1 -> lit101 : statusRequest
lit101 -> i(plc1): high
plc1 -> lit101 : statusRequest
lit101 -> i(plc1): highhigh
plc1 -> lit101 : statusRequest
lit101 -> i(plc1): aboveThreshold
To perform this attack, the attacker waits while the water
level is increasing in the tank dropping all the responses sent
from the LIT101 to the PLC1 ( i(plc) indicates that the at-
tacker iis intercepting the message addressed to the PLC).
The tank will then overow because the PLC1 will not stop
the inowing of the water. We have performed our experi-
ments with over- and underow, and both with and without
encryption of messages between PLCs and tanks/LITs but
encryption does not prevent the Insider to achieve the goal.
For all the processes the attacker (either with Cybercrimi-
nal or Insider prole) can easily overow the tank. However,
the attacker with an Insider prole can directly manipulate
one of the manual valve to achieve the goal. For example,
we have tested our formal specication with respect to the
security goal that if the MV101 is open, the level of the wa-
ter in the tank T101 needs to be equal to a certain abstractvalue low(the system lls up the tank if the level is low to
prevent overows).
2(systemStatus(mv 101; open))systemStatus(t101; low ))
CL-AtSe reports the following attack trace, in which the
HC_open(Component) is the HC (see Section 3.1.1) that al-
lows an attacker that has physical access to the CPS to man-
ually open a component, and STare the numbered steps of
the attack.
ST_1. systemStatus(p101,on)
ST_1. systemStatus(mv101,close)
ST_2. systemStatus(t101,low)
ST_3. HC_open[Component=mv101]
The goal can be trivially achieved by waiting that the level
of the water increases up to a level above lowdue to the in-
owing water. However, since CL-AtSe reports (only) the
rst attack trace found (not all the possible attack traces
leading to the same attack) and given that the water was
decreasing in the initial system status, CL-AtSe reports the
expected attack trace. We note that in practice, this process
usually reports a cyber attack (without any manual opera-
tion) even if a manual operation of a valve would be the
most straightforward attack. We assume this is due to the
implementation of CL-AtSe. In particular, CL-AtSe is an
implementation of the DY attacker model and the manual
operations are encoded in the attack model as Horn Clauses.
That dierence between manual and cyberattacks could ex-
plain the cyberattacks to be found rst.
Changing Status of Components. The second set of at-
tacks is related to changing the status of a component. Most
of the components are aected, since if the attacker sends
a malicious message to the component on behalf of a PLC,
then that component will change its status accordingly. As
an example, we have specied that in the initial state of
the system all the pumps are o and no water is owing in
the system. We have then dened a security goal specifying
that a security violation occurs when the ow meter FIT201
(placed after the pump P101) reports no ow and the pump
P101 is on (the pump should not be on when there is no
water to pump out of the tank T101).
2:(systemStatus(fit 201; noFlow )^
systemStatus(p101; on ))
The communication in SWaT is not encrypted, thus an
attacker can change the payloads of messages without a key.
This leads both the Cybercriminal and the Insider to achieve
this goal and CL-AtSe reports the following attack trace.
systemStatus(fit201,noFlow)
i(plc1) -> p101 : open
However, several components can only be operated man-
ually (i.e., manual valves, drains). Thus, only the Insider is
able to open drains and manual valves. These manual op-
erations can be exploited in more sophisticated attacks (for
example, combining manual and network operations).
121Alter Chemical Dosing. With altering chemical dosing
we mean that the attacker can eectively control the pumps
and LITs of process 2 (i.e., chemical dosing process). When
an attacker alters the behavior of a pump by, e.g., open
it when it should be closed, the chemical process is inu-
enced. Considering the concentrations of chemicals in the
water would indeed be more accurate, but our current sys-
tem model does not permit such details.
We have, however, tested our formal specication with
respect to goals related to the level of the chemicals in the
tanks in process 2. For example, we have dened that the
chemicals in tank t201 cannot be below a threshold lowlow
as follows:
2:(systemStatus(t201; lowlow ))
The attack traces reported by CL-AtSe are similar to the
ones already reported in this section.
Flow/Pressure Drop. The last set of attacks are related
to the pressure or ow drops/increase. One way to achieve
these goals, is to trick the PLCs in reading fake values of
PITs or FITs. Another way is to prevent the water to ow
through a PIT/FIT while a pump (after the PIT/FIT) is on.
If we specify an initial state of the system where the pump
P101 is on (lowering the water in T101) and we analyze the
specication with respect to the following security goal:
2:(systemStatus(fit 201; noFlow )^
systemStatus(p101; on ))
CL-AtSe returns the following attack trace where the at-
tacker drops all the packets that should alert the PLC1 that
the level of the water in the tank T101 is decreasing until
the tank is empty. The attacker then opens the pump P101.
lit101 -> i(plc1) : low
lit101 -> i(plc1) : lowlow
lit101 -> i(plc1) : belowThreshold
i(plc1) -> p101 : open
5. PRACTICAL ASSESSMENT
A formal security assessment is performed over a system
model that abstracts away some of the details of the real
system. In order to concretely exploit on the real system the
attacks (or attack traces) found with a formal assessment,
one has to concretize those attacks. In other words, one has
to bridge the abstraction gap between the formalized system
and the real system. In CPS this is a very complicated task
due to the complexity of the system. In this section, we
report a comparison between the results we have obtained
with our design-time analysis and the attacks found with
practical assessment.
5.1 Context of practical assessment
For the practical assessment, we invited six teams from
industry and academia to practically attack the real sys-
tem [2]. The teams could choose between three dierent
attacker proles to conduct the attack. In addition to the
insider and cybercriminal, a strong attacker prole was avail-
able that we do not discuss further in this work. Each at-
tacker prole had dierent capabilities, benets and/or con-
straints following our proles as outlined in Section 2. The
main goals that the teams have been challenged to achieve
are the following:
Physical Process Goals , control over physical actuators
and processes, i.e., valve status, tank ll level, pipe
pressure, chemical dosing.Sensor Data Goals , demonstrate control over sensor
readings at dierent components, i.e., PLC, local dis-
play of sensor, PLC, HMI, SCADA, Historian.
The results of the attacks using the Cybercriminal and In-
sider attacker prole are discussed next.
5.1.1 Cybercriminal
This attacker prole has no physical access to the system
and then the team that chose this prole could not manually
interact with the system (e.g., could not manually open a
valve). For the same reason they did not have access to the
L0 ring. In addition, no knowledge about the system and
no specic tools for the modication of PLC logic have been
provided. Assuming an high level of hacking skills (accord-
ing to [31]) the team with this prole have been provided
with a virtual machine with access to the L1 network. This
has been done to simulate a compromised machine. The of-
fensive capabilities of this attacker have not been limited,
i.e., ARP spoong, exploits, brute force attacks have been
permitted.
5.1.2 Insider
By choosing this attacker prole, the team has physical
access to the testbed and then to the tools that any em-
ployee could have access to (e.g., Studio5000 to read and
modify the logic of PLC). They can then physically manip-
ulate valves and change network topology. An Insider is
assumed to have password of all main components of the
system, for example, SCADA, and Historian. He also can
operate directly with the HMI/SCADA system. However,
the oensive knowledge of an Insider is limited (with re-
spect to a Cybercriminal) and an Insider cannot perform
ARP spoong or brute force attacks and he cannot use ex-
ploits. The hacking tools allowed with this prole are limited
too and, for example, network scanners are not allowed (but
the attacker has previous knowledge of the system).
5.2 Attacks Found with Practical Assessment
During the practical assessment the teams have performed
the dierent attacks following similar attack patterns. The
attacks on tank ll level were performed with an Insider at-
tacker prole by all teams. The teams have used the HMI
(as an Insider) to set the system (pumps and valves) in such
a way that the tank either over or under-owed. The same
technique has been exploited to perform attacks on pumps ,
valves andchemical dosing . For the chemical dosing attack,
the attackers have kept open the pump responsible for the
chemical dosing of the water longer than the default time.
This should lead to an increasing of the chemicals in the
water that ultimately spoils the membrane in the reverse
osmosis process (process 5). However, precautionary proce-
dures were set up before the attacks in order to not spoil the
reverse osmosis process.
A number of DoS (Denial of Service) attacks have been
performed to attack PLCs or HMI/SCADA (e.g., by using
Ettercap [26]). One DoS was performed by physically dis-
connecting the Ethernet cable from one of the PLC. This
prevented the PLC to communicate with the system.
5.3 Formal vs. Practical Assessment
In this section, we compare the attacks found with our
formal technique (performed independently and before the
practical assessment) with the practical assessment. A gen-
eral overview is given in Table 4.
The attacks found from the practical assessment are very
similar to the ones we have found with our formal analysis
of SWaT. In 7 cases (on 8 total cases considered) the attacks
are exactly the same (on dierent level of abstraction). Ex-
amples for those attacks are the ones on on pumps, valves,
122Table 3: Attacks found with the formal assessment
Security Goal Target Component Time
Cy
bercrim.
I
nsiderCo
mponents Involved
Pro
cesses
Co
nsidered
Ov
erow Tank T101 21.164s  LIT101, LIT301 All
Overow Tank (no alarm) T101 5.094h  LIT101 All
Empty Tank T101 1.868s  LIT101 P1
Drain Water T301 16.960s  ManualValve301 P3
Overow Tank (manual operations) T101 19.736s  MV101 P1
Fake Flow FIT201 35.773m  LIT101, PLC1, PLC2, P101 P1,P2
Empty Chemical Tanks T201,T202,T203 0.872s   P201,P202,P203 P2
LIT201,LIT202,LIT203
c
hemical dosing, and tanks. However, due to the dierent
level of abstraction of the two techniques, some of the details
of the attack strategies are dierent. For example, during
the practical assessment, when an attacker wanted to send
spoofed values of one component to the PLC, he had to set
rst the PLC in manual mode. Manual mode enables the
PLC to accept messages from the HMI and then the attacker
can modify the payload of those messages. If manual mode
is not enabled, the messages of the attacker are overwritten
with the real message of the sensors [38]. Thus, an attacker
has to physically access the SWaT testbed and manually
switch the PLC to manual mode. In our formal analysis, we
have not considered such practical details. Therefore, some
of the attacks that can be performed with a Cybercriminal
prole in our attack model, are not directly feasible in the
real system. While in the real system, a Cybercriminal could
perform the attack whenever the PLC is in manual mode,
he would potentially need to wait until someone with phys-
ical access to the PLC changes the default mode to manual
mode.
Summarizing, our formal analysis predicted the practical
attacks (apart from the ones to the HMI/SCADA that were
not considered in the attack model for performance issues).
Another interesting result is that with our attack model we
can easily predict that most of the attacks will still be pos-
sible even when adding cryptography and signature to the
communication between components. In addition, the map-
ping between the attacks found in the formal analysis are
not easily mapped to the real system (due to the techni-
cal details abstracted away in the attack model) but they
provide a quite accurate description of the outcome of the
attack, the components involved, the semantics of the mod-
ication in the payload, and often about the strategy of the
attacker.
6. RELATED WORK
In [31], a systematic analysis of the literature have been
performed to collect and categorize the main aspects of a
Cyber-Physical attacker model. The results have been im-
plemented in a free open-source tool available in [28]. How-
ever, the authors do not focus on how to use the attacker
models they dened for the formal analysis of CPS.
A rst step in the direction of the formal analysis of a
water treatment plant has been performed in [30]. A sim-
ple scenario of a subprocess of a water treatment plant has
been dened. Our system model considers all the processes
involved in SWaT and dierent attacker proles.
In [1], the authors performed a security analysis of a water
treatment testbed. They do not apply any formal analysis
tool and a practical assessment is reported. They report a
table with a number of attacks on the physical process. With
our formal analysis we are able to detect all of the attacksTable 4: Comparison between manual and formal
analysis
A
nalysis by
V
alves
Pu
mps
Pre
ssure
T
ank ll level
Ch
emical dosing
H
istorian
H
MI/SCADA
PL
C
T
eam 1 I C I
Team 2 C
Team 3 I I S C S
Team 4 I I I I I
Team 5 I C
Team 6 I C I
Formal Verif. C,I C,I C,I C,I C,I I { I
Th
e I, C, and S stands for Insider, Cybercriminal, and
strong attacker proles used to perform the attack. The
attacker prole S and the HMI/SCADA have not been
considered in the formal assessment
reported in [1] but with a loss of details due to the dierent
abstraction level. The main dierence between that work
and our work is that in [1], the authors report the details of
the real values of their attacks, while we identify the attack
steps.
In [23], the authors analyze the security of the same wa-
ter treatment testbed by creating a formal model in Alloy
formal language and then analyzing the system model with
Alloy analyzer [21]. The authors have not used any for-
mal attacker model or prole and they have considered only
three processes of the testbed. In this work, we applied sev-
eral modications of the standard Dolev-Yao attacker model
and we also applied two dierent attacker proles. As result,
we detected a number of attacks that supersede the attacks
reported in [23].
ADVISE. In [19, 24], authors formally dene a framework
for the identication of attacks in CPS. In this formaliza-
tion, the authors dene a set of abstract components to de-
scribe an attack execution graphs (AEG) and an attacker
model. The AEG represents potential attack steps against
the system, together with a formal denition of the attacker
using a set of 6 dimensions. This formalization has been im-
plemented in a framework called ADVISE where users can
dene their own attacker models, e.g., dening the knowl-
edge of the attacker with respect to the AEG. The ADVISE
tool does not provide a list of attacker proles and, in gen-
eral, the attacker has to be dened by the user. With our
approach we provide two dierent attacker prole and we
123provide rules that extend the standard DY attacker model
capabilities.
CyberSAGE. In [41], the authors describe the Cyber Se-
curity Argument Graph Evaluation tool for CPS security
assessment. The tool can automatically security argument
graphs describing: the workow of a CPS (i.e., how the sys-
tem provides its functionalities), the security goals, and an
attacker model. Note here that this graph matches with
our denition of attack model in Section 2.1. For the de-
scription of the goal and workow information CyberSAGE
supports XMI formats input. The topology of the network
is automatically extracted and the devices of the system are
associated with properties (e.g., availability) according to
heuristics.
7. CONCLUSIONS
In this work we proposed a formal modeling of ICS and ap-
plied our modeling technique to a real-world water treatment
testbed called SWaT. In addition, we proposed a formaliza-
tion of all the dimensions proposed in the APE [28] frame-
work. The attack model that we implemented in ASLan++
is around 1000 lines long and contains more than 50 en-
tities. The ASLan++ specication generates 269 ASLan
rules (i.e., transition rules). Using that model, we then per-
formed a formal security assessment of SWaT against two
dierent attacker proles, Cybercriminal and Insider, using
CL-AtSe, a formal security analysis tool. We showed that
with our formal technique we can identify attacks to the se-
curity of SWaT that take into account the logic of the ICS.
To show that our results can be concretely used to reason
on the security of ICS we compare our formal assessment
results with the results of an independent practical assess-
ment performed by six dierent teams (from industry and
academia). The comparison shows that 7 (out of 8) dier-
ent attacks found during the practical assessment were also
discovered by our formal analysis. We did not cover the last
attack type as our abstraction does not cover the related
components in the system model.
Acknowledgments.
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful com-
ments and suggestions. This work was supported by the
National Research Foundation of Singapore under grant
NRF2014NCR-NCR001-40.
8. REFERENCES
[1] S. Adepu and A. Mathur. An investigation into the
response of a water treatment system into cyber
attacks. In IEEE Symposium on High Assurance
Systems Engineering (HASE) , 2015.
[2] D. Antonioli, H. R. Ghaeini, S. Adepu, M. Ochoa, and
N. O. Tippenhauer. Gamifying education and research
on ics security: Design, implementation and results of
s3. 2017. Cornell University, ArXiv e-Prints,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1702.03067v1.
[3] A. Armando, W. Arsac, T. Avanesov, M. Barletta,
A. Calvi, A. Cappai, R. Carbone, Y. Chevalier,
L. Compagna, J. Cu ellar, G. Erzse, S. Frau, M. Minea,
S. Modersheim, D. von Oheimb, G. Pellegrino, S. E.
Ponta, M. Rocchetto, M. Rusinowitch, M. T. Dashti,
M. Turuani, and L. Vigan o. The AVANTSSAR
platform for the automated validation of trust and
security of service-oriented architectures. In Tools and
Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of
Systems (TACAS) , pages 267{282, 2012.
[4] A. Armando, D. A. Basin, Y. Boichut, Y. Chevalier,
L. Compagna, J. Cu ellar, P. H. Drielsma, P. H eam,
O. Kouchnarenko, J. Mantovani, S. M odersheim,D. von Oheimb, M. Rusinowitch, J. Santiago,
M. Turuani, L. Vigan o, and L. Vigneron. The AVISPA
tool for the automated validation of internet security
protocols and applications. In Proceedings of Computer
Aided Verication, (CAV) , pages 281{285, 2005.
[5] A. Armando and L. Compagna. SATMC: a SAT-based
model checker for security protocols. In JELIA , LNAI
3229. Springer, 2004.
[6] AVANTSSAR. Deliverable 5.3: AVANTSSAR Library
of validated problem cases. www.avantssar.eu, 2010.
[7] AVANTSSAR. Deliverable 2.3 (update): ASLan++
specication and tutorial, 2011. Available at
http://www.avantssar.eu.
[8] D. Basin, S. Capkun, P. Schaller, and B. Schmidt.
Let's get physical: Models and methods for real-world
security protocols. In Proceedings of Theorem Proving
in Higher Order Logics , 2009.
[9] D. Basin, S. Capkun, P. Schaller, and B. Schmidt.
Formal reasoning about physical properties of security
protocols. Transactions on Information and System
Security (TISSEC) , 14(2):16, 2011.
[10] D. Basin, S. M odersheim, and L. Vigan o. OFMC: A
symbolic model checker for security protocols. Journal
of Information Security , 4(3):181{208, 2005.
[11] M. Bugliesi, S. Calzavara, S. M odersheim, and
P. Modesti. Security protocol specication and
verication with AnBx. behaviour , 15:16, 2015.
[12] A. A. C ardenas, S. M. Amin, B. Sinopoli, A. Giani,
A. Perrig, and S. S. Sastry. Challenges for securing
cyber physical systems. In Workshop on Future
Directions in Cyber-physical Systems Security . DHS,
July 2009.
[13] A. A. C ardenas, T. Roosta, and S. Sastry. Rethinking
security properties, threat models, and the design
space in sensor networks: A case study in SCADA
systems. Ad Hoc Networks , 7(8):1434{1447, 2009.
[14] D. E. Denning. Activism, hacktivism, and
cyberterrorism: The internet as a tool for inuencing
foreign policy. In Networks and Netwars: The Future
of Terror, Crime, and Militancy . RAND Corporation,
2001.
[15] P. Derler, E. A. Lee, and A. S. Vincentelli. Modeling
cyber-physical systems. Proceedings of the IEEE ,
100(1):13{28, Jan 2012.
[16] D. Dolev and A. C. Yao. On the security of public key
protocols. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory ,
29(2):198{207, 1983.
[17] A. Doup e, M. Cova, and G. Vigna. Why Johnny Can't
Pentest: An Analysis of Black-Box Web Vulnerability
Scanners , pages 111{131. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2010.
[18] B. Feddersen, K. Keefe, W. H. Sanders, C. Muehrcke,
D. Parks, A. Crapo, A. Gabaldon, and R. Palla. An
ontological model for constructing mobius advise
security models. In Proceedings of Conference on
Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN) , 2015.
[19] M. D. Ford, K. Keefe, E. LeMay, W. H. Sanders, and
C. Muehrcke. Implementing the ADVISE security
modeling formalism in m obius. In IEEE/IFIP
Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks
(DSN) , 2013.
[20] B. Galloway and G. Hancke. Introduction to industrial
control networks. Communications Surveys Tutorials,
IEEE , 15(2):860{880, 2013.
[21] D. Jackson. Software Abstractions: Logic, Language,
and Analysis . The MIT Press, 2006.
[22] K. H. John and M. Tiegelkamp. IEC 61131-3:
Programming Industrial Automation Systems Concepts
124Figure 5: The details of the SWaT components and connections. The tag MaV is for manual valve, MV for
motorized valve, T for tank, AIT for Analyzer Indicator Transmitter, FIT for Flow Indicator Transmitter,
PIT for Pressure Indicator Transmitter
and Programming Languages, Requirements for
Programming Systems, Decision-Making Aids .
Springer, 2nd edition, 2010.
[23] E. Kang, S. Adepu, D. Jackson, and A. P. Mathur.
Model-based security analysis of a water treatment
system. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Software
Engineering for Smart Cyber-Physical Systems , pages
22{28. ACM, 2016.
[24] E. LeMay, M. D. Ford, K. Keefe, W. H. Sanders, and
C. Muehrcke. Model-based security metrics using
adversary view security evaluation (ADVISE). In
Proceedings of Conference on Quantitative Evaluation
of Systems, QEST , 2011.
[25] A. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer. A water treatment
testbed for research and training on ics security. In
Proceedings of Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems
for Smart Water Networks (CySWater) , Apr. 2016.
[26] A. Ornaghi and M. Valleri. Ettercap.
https://ettercap.github.io/ettercap/, last visited
August 3 2016.
[27] M. Rocchetto, M. Ochoa, and M. Torabi Dashti.
Model-based detection of CSRF. In ICT Systems
Security and Privacy Protection , volume 428 of IFIP
Advances in Information and Communication
Technology . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014.
[28] M. Rocchetto and N. O. Tippenhauer. APE (Attacker
Prole Examiner), 2016. Available at
http://research.scy-phy.net/ape/.
[29] M. Rocchetto and N. O. Tippenhauer. ASLan++
formal model of SWaT, 2016. Available at
https://research.scy-phy.net/swatmodel.
[30] M. Rocchetto and N. O. Tippenhauer. CPDY:
Extending the dolev-yao attacker with physical-layerinteractions. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Formal Engineering Methods (ICFEM) ,
2016.
[31] M. Rocchetto and N. O. Tippenhauer. On attacker
models and proles for cyber-physical systems. In
Proceedings of the European Simposium on Research
in Computer Security (ESORICS) , 2016.
[32] P. Schaller, B. Schmidt, D. A. Basin, and S. Capkun.
Modeling and verifying physical properties of security
protocols for wireless networks. In Computer Security
Foundations Symposium (CSF) , pages 109{123, 2009.
[33] V. Schier, D. Vangompel, and R. Voss. The common
industrial protocol (CIP) and the family of CIP
networks. ODVA , 2006.
[34] M. Schmidt and H. Lipson. Distilling free-form natural
laws from experimental data. science ,
324(5923):81{85, 2009.
[35] R. Software. Studio 5000R.
http://www.rockwellautomation.com/
rockwellsoftware/products/studio-5000.page, last
visited August 3 2016.
[36] D. Steinmetzer, M. Schulz, and M. Hollick.
Lockpicking physical layer key exchange: Weak
adversary models invite the thief. In Proc. ACM
Conference Wireless Security (WiSeC) , 2015.
[37] M. Turuani. The CL-Atse Protocol Analyser. In RTA,
LNCS 4098, 2006.
[38] D. Urbina, J. Giraldo, N. O. Tippenhauer, and
A. Cardenas. Attacking eldbus communications in
ICS: Applications to the SWaT testbed. In
Proceedings of Singapore Cyber Security R&D
Conference (SG-CRC) , Jan. 2016.
[39] R. Vigo. The cyber-physical attacker. In Proceedings
125of Workshop of Conference on Computer Safety,
Reliability, and Security (SAFECOMP) , 2012.
[40] D. von Oheimb and S. M odersheim. ASLan++ | a
formal security specication language for distributed
systems. In FMCO , LNCS 6957. Springer, 2010.
[41] A. H. Vu, N. O. Tippenhauer, B. Chen, D. M. Nicol,
and Z. Kalbarczyk. CyberSAGE: A tool for automatic
security assessment of cyber-physical systems. In
Proceeding of Quantitative Evaluation of Systems
(QEST) , pages 384{387, 2014.
[42] S. Weinberger. Computer security: Is this the start of
cyberwarfare? Nature, 174:142{145, June 2011.APPENDIX
A. SWaT PROCESSES
The details of the overall process of SWaT are depicted
in Figure 5. The picture represents the initial status of the
system model that we have considered in our formal assess-
ment. The level of the water inside the tanks is at an optimal
status (not high nor low), all the manual valves are opened,
all the pumps are closed and only the rst motorized valve
MV101 is open (i.e., the water in T101 is lling up).
126