Spirituality in Design
The connection between faith 
and technology has long vexed 
design. Against the backdrop 
of secular scientific traditions, 
programs of technology 
development enchant and compel, 
reinforcing particular belief systems 
and ways of encountering the world 
around us, whether through religious 
practices or otherwise. Beyond the tools 
and systems, our scholarly communities 
guide and reflect additional forms 
of spiritual work that so many of 
us do. Billions of people across the 
globe engage in spiritual practices, of 
which our own experiences are only 
a small part. And yet, despite this 
abundance, much of our scholarly work 
has struggled to engage critically and 
generativity with faith-based values, 
beliefs, and practices. 
To explore and expand this 
analytic horizon, this issue gathers 
reflections from a range of scholars 
and practitioners engaged in spiritual 
work, focusing on their connection 
with computing technologies and their 
relationship to design theories and 
scholarship. In this issue’s conversation, 
Hong-An Wu and Caitlin Lustig 
discuss the capacity of tarot cards to work as a technology of resistance 
and change. Jessica Hammer and 
Samantha Reig consider lashon hara , a 
halachic (relating to Jewish law) term 
that focuses on the truthfulness of a 
speech act as well as on the positive 
or negative effects of a speech act on 
a person. Kentaro Toyama’s article 
casts modernist principles—objective 
truth, material outcome, and public 
remuneration—as the root of many 
harmful technology-driven outcomes 
and explores how an engagement with 
religion could help scholars turn from 
technologies toward internals . Drawing 
on Christianity’s concern for strong 
relationships, Alexis Hiniker and Jacob 
Wobbrock propose a relationship-
centered design process to support 
adjacent ways of life worldwide. 
Referencing theological discourse, 
Joyojeet Pal discusses the role social 
media plays in the creation of Hindutva, 
a society based on Hindu values. 
Critiquing HCI spirituality literature, 
Elizabeth Buie argues for a stronger 
definition of transcendence experiences 
and introduces a principle of Unitarian 
Universalism that emphasizes hope, 
love, and collective justice. Responding 
to 19th-century notions of rationality and reason, Nashra Mahmood 
considers the God-like attributes 
attributed to cyborg visions. Moving 
toward the restoration of Indigenous 
epistemologies, Pat Vera introduces 
a land-based design approach that 
scaffolds the transmission of memories 
and lived experiences. Elizabeth Chin 
extends these arguments by exploring 
the ways Vodou and Santería rituals 
reflect and get reflected by particular 
technological worlds.
Across these varied reflections, 
this issue explores both the potentials 
and difficulties of research related to 
faith and computing. Whether secular, 
polytheistic, pantheistic, divinistic, or 
glossolalic, we learn that the crossing of 
physical and more-than-physical realms 
opens compelling orientations for 
reimagining our collective lives.
Daniela Rosner,  
Alex Taylor,  
Mikael Wiberg, 
eic@interactions.acm.org  
 
with Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat, 
Nusrat Jahan Mim, Firaz Peer,  
Hawra Rabaan, Maryam Mustafa,   
and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed (guest editors)
This issue explores both the 
potentials and difficulties of research 
related to faith and computing. 
DOI: 10.1145/3544302  COPYRIGHT HELD BY AUTHORS
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
JULY–AUGUST 2022   INTERACTIONS   5
WELCOME
Daniela Rosner,
University of 
Washington
Mikael Wiberg,
Umeå UniversityAlex Taylor, 
City, University of 
London