Bibles and BioShock : Affording Religious Discussion on 
Video Game Forums  
Lars de Wildt, Stef Aupers  
KU Leuven  
Leuven, Belgium  
lars.dewildt@kuleuven.be  
stef.aupers @kuleuven.be  
 
ABSTRACT 
This study sets forth to analyze and categorize attitudes 
shown by communities of players on internet forums, 
debating religious worldviews in games such as BioShock 
and Assassin’s Creed . It does so in light of the theo- and 
technological affordances that shape these discussions 
through the platforms of digital games and internet forums . 
Is the predominance of religion in games, as noted by other 
scholars, actually a topic of discussion for players 
themselves ? And if so, which games afford discussion? What 
attitudes are displayed? And what are the motivations behind 
these attitudes? A multi-method approach is presented , 
analyzing 91 discussions and 20 interviews; rooted in 
extensive familiarization with the relevant games. Research 
outcomes include a typology of user attitudes, part of which 
actively seek out enchantment in the face of secularization . 
These are theorized in the context of two affordances: the 
theological affordances of some interactive systems to invite 
play with religious worldviews in a secularizing world; and 
the technological affordances of the internet forum as a 
platform that affords but shapes forum discourse. 
Author Keywords 
Player research; online discussion platforms ; games and 
worldview ; multi-method; online communities .  
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous; H.5.3 . Information interfaces and 
presentation: Group and Organization Interfaces ---Web-
based interaction ; K.4.m. Computers and Society: 
Miscellaneous; K.8.0. Personal Computing: General ---
Games. General Terms: Human Factors. INTRODUCTION  
Every day, millions of players around the world engage in 
fictional worlds that appear profoundly religious, 
incorporating religious imagery, narratives and rituals. 
Despite living in an age of supposed secularization, they are 
playing Assassin’s Creed [93]), Dark Souls [36], BioShock: 
Infinite [53], or other games across genres, which draw on a 
variety of religious traditions. Moreover, players seldom do 
so in isolation: they gather online in large numbers to discuss 
what those games mean, within the digital affordances of an 
online forum: a threaded, hierarchized and pseudonymous 
community .  
Throughout genres, games utilize religion to present worlds 
and rituals for players to interact with. Historical games try 
to quantify the political influence of church allegiances (e.g., 
Civilization VI  [34]; Europa Universalis [73] or narrativize 
the power of secret religious organizations ( Assassin’s 
Creed ). Fantasy games like Zelda: Breath of the Wild  [70], 
and The Witcher 3  [20] regularly have players deal with 
various gods, their shrines and those who worship them. 
Religion appears in the shape of oppressive theocracy in 
first-person shooter BioShock: Infinite ; but as a source of 
hope in Fantasy RPG Dragon Age: Inquisition [10]. It 
appears in the guise of world-threatening fundamentalist 
terrorists in military games such as Call of Duty 4  [52]; or as 
a humanizing insight into the personal background of your 
favourite helicopter pilot, Faridah Malik in Deus Ex: Human 
Revolution  [32].  
While many of these games are single-player games meant 
to play in isolation , players can be found online, discussing 
these games and their meanings to them. They do so in great 
numbers, on internet forums such as Reddit (243.6 million 
users), IGN (1.2 million) down to  more select forums such as 
NeoGAF  (151 thousand), which have month-long waiting 
lists. Other than social media, forums are pseudonymous and 
are overall more hierarchical, both in their chronological 
ordering of messages and thematised subdivisions of topics; 
as well as their moderation by ‘mods,’ who approve posts 
and users, enforce etiquette and police the tone of 
discussions. Phenomena such as “GamerGate” have shown 
that forums are societally and academically relevant, if only 
due to the (pseudo-)anonymous, semi-organized force of 
online gamer communities’ policing of identity: the white,  
male, heterosexual “gamer” [14, 22, 61]. What place does Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies a re 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is pe rmitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permis sions from 
Permissions@acm.org . 
 
CHI PLAY '17, October 15 –18, 2017, Amsterdam, Netherlands  
© 2017 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights 
licensed to ACM.  
ACM ISBN 978 -1-4503 -4898 -0/17/10…$15.00  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3116595.3116625  
 
Session 8: Beyond the Typical Player Experience
CHI PLAY 2017, October 15–18, 2017, Amsterdam, NL 
463religiosity take in this intersection of stereotypical identity? 
And how do these pseudonymous communities discuss the 
topic of religion in games? 
LITERATURE 
Outside of forums , several academic communities have been 
dedicated to finding and analyzing the religious heritage in 
digital games. Several edited volumes [30, 16, 86], 
dissertations [88, 75], and entire journals (the 
Gamevironment  journal and Heidelberg’s Online ) carefully 
root out and interpret video games’ reliance on religious 
tropes. Content analyses, especially in the context of 
theology or religious studies, eagerly identify religious 
representations in game narratives and aesthetics, finding 
Judaism [62], Islam [84, 85], Hinduism [72, 99] or “God” 
[56, 12, 96]. From a slightly different perspective, religious 
scholars and sociologists of religion have argued that game-
design may function  as religion. Design, it has been argued , 
may disclose what Huizinga called, a “magic circle, [a] 
temple,” among other metaphors [50], which temporarily 
affords community-formation and collective effervescence 
[90, 37]; which may provide rule-structured ethical 
di
lemmas for reflection [37, 82, 83, 98]; and, like religion, 
produce ultimate meaning through the “procedural rhetoric” 
of rituals [94, 11]. 
This is odd, because philosophers and sociologists of religion 
have long point ed to the perceived (and abundantly 
theorized) loss of religion as a source of meaning in 
secularized society as a whole. After all, Nietzsche’s “God is 
dead” decries first and foremost the loss of the Christian god 
as a moral authority in which to ground a shared set of 
cultural beliefs and truths: a loss of orientation (“whither are 
we moving?”) from which to make sense of morality, 
meaning and a world without transcendence [68, 43, 19, 97] . 
This “tremendous event” of god’s death, which “ha[d] not 
yet reached the ears of men” when Nietzsche  wrote in 1882 
[68], finds resonance with Weber, who stresses that the 
disenchantment of the world [ die Entzauberung der Welt ]…  
“…destines us to realize more clearly these struggles 
[of meaning] after our eyes have been blinded for a 
thousand years by the allegedly or presumably 
exclusive orientation towards the grandiose moral 
fervor of Christian ethics” [95]  
As various authors have stated, a modern world that cannot 
give transcendent meaning to everyday human lives is 
experienced as meaningless, abstrac t, or “alienated” [6, 60, 
100; see also 47]. As a consequence, “no longer provided 
with pre-given and solidly grounded meaning and subjected 
to rationalized modern institutions,” Dick Houtman and Stef 
Aupers argue, “modern selves find themselves plagued by  
nagging questions […] ‘Do I really want this?’ and ‘What 
sort of person am I, really?” [47].  
Popular culture has been presented by many such 
sociologists as an enduring displacement (or even 
replacement) of religion as a ground for enchantment, belief 
and ultimate meaning [74, 23, 78, cf. 92]. Outside of established, institutionalized religions, individuals 
increasingly constitute their own systems of ultimate 
significance [57], in what Thomas Luckmann call ed 
“bricolage,” a mixing of religious elements [58], and others 
have called “pick -and mix religion’’ [42] or a “spiritual 
supermarket” [59, 3]. 
Some fictional texts, films, games and their worlds are 
particularly prone to be taken up for meaning-making [27, 
92]. Markus Davidsen calls the properties of such fictions 
“religious affordances,” after ecological psychologist James 
Gibson’s concept of certain use -objects offering “action 
possibilities,” i.e., “affordances” [38]. Consumers distil 
meaning from such texts and fictional worlds, with digital 
gaming wor lds newly enabling “people[‘s] choos[ing] 
realities that are experienced as real, meaningful and 
enchanting” [3; see also 46]. Even  when these experience 
appear initially in contradiction to their own (non-)religious 
worldviews, incorporating witches [74]; shaman and druidic 
worship [56]; or “Buddhist [and] Hindu stuff” into existing 
beliefs [45]. These experiences are not bound to pre-
established or “history -based” religiosities, but can freely 
include “fiction -based” [27], “invented” [26], or “hyper -
real”  religions [77] in which individuals are inspired by 
fiction to construct belief systems such as ‘Jediism,’ 
‘Matrixism’ (ibid.), or any number of Tolkien -inspired 
religions [27] .  
Players, meanwhile, do their own research as amateurs, in 
groups: as lovers of games, religion or both. More so than 
other media, digital games are surrounded by an enthusiastic 
and medium-specific “gamer culture” that relies on internet 
forums, community-made ‘wiki’ -encyclopediae and fan 
cultures to discuss games and what it means (for better or 
worse) to be a “gamer” [89, 81, 14]. When discussing games’ 
meanings online, communities of players discuss and 
negotiate games’ meanings within the subcultural context of 
game culture.  
Moreover, they do so within the technological context of 
online forums. As has been noted [e.g., 29, 55], online forum 
c
ommunities bring with them the affordance of 
pseudonymity, which allows both recognition (of the 
pseudonym) and relative anonymity outside of the forum . 
This recognition in turn allows forum users to accumulate 
social capital and prestige – being able to rise even, say, to 
the level of moderator or administrator. Many forums have 
elaborate hierarchies of users, the top ranks of which can 
decide on the structure of forums (divisions, subdivisions 
and themes) and which threads and users are allowed to 
participate. On the other hand, the relative anonymity of 
pseudonymity affords users not to be nominally responsible 
for the content of one’s post (as with platforms such as 
Facebook , which enforces the use of real names) makes it 
possible for niche, controversial and illegal opinions and 
groups to convene, making forums for many a place where 
“nowhere I could talk like that” [29, 14, 55, 61]. 
Session 8: Beyond the Typical Player Experience
CHI PLAY 2017, October 15–18, 2017, Amsterdam, NL 
464When discussing games on forums such as Reddit , NeoGAF 
and other platforms, gamers such as these form “interpretiv e 
communities:” groups of consumers sharing overlapping 
“interpretive strategies” for texts and other cultural artefacts, 
based on knowledge and cultural assumptions about things 
such as genre conventions, authorial intention, and so on in 
order to establish shared interpretations [35]. Interpretive 
communities are a helpful concept in that it helps “explain 
why there are disagreements and why they can be debated in 
a principled way:” not because games have a stable or 
intended meaning, but because interpretive communities 
offer stabilized and opposing positions from which to 
interpret games’ meanings [35]. These communities and 
their opposing positions of interpretation, originate for Fish 
broadly in the set of cultural assumptions which allow 
communities of readers/consumers (in this case, players or 
even ‘gamers’) to create meanings from the game in ways 
that make sense to them, and on which they can agree. In 
some time-worn examples – such as your high school 
English literature class – interpretive communities can 
become dominant so as to render their interpretations 
canonical. Some examples of near-canonical interpretations 
include, e.g., that most of Shakespeare’s sonnets address his 
love for a young boy; that “rosebud” represents Citizen 
Kane ’s protagonist’s childhood comfort (through the image 
of the sled); or that the child protagonist and his sister in the 
game Limbo  are both bound to fruitlessly search the afterlife 
forever.  
How do the online interpretive communities of players 
engage with religion? Instead of theologians, sociologists 
and religious scholars as interpretive communities, this paper 
looks at players and the game culture(s) that surround them: 
is the predominance of religion in games a topic of 
discussion for them? And what games do they actually 
discuss? Outside of academic analysis, again, the “gamer” 
which asserts himself in online communities in the 21st 
century as stereotypically white, heterosexual and male, and 
seems increasingly willing to police these boundaries [22 , 54, 40]. What position does religiosity have, next to race, 
sexuality and gender, within this culturalized gamer identity? 
While earlier research indicates that players navigate 
religious identity and pluralism in response to religious 
content in games on an individual  level [4, 80], there is little 
insight into how communities – in other words, gamer 
cultures  – engage with such content. This paper looks at how 
players interpret and discuss religion in games, based on how 
they discuss it in large groups on public platforms, asking:  
- Which games provoke discussions of their religious 
content on public forums?  
- Which religious positions and perspectives are 
represented in these discussions?  
- Which attitudes do players take toward the meaning 
of religious content in digital games? 
This paper thus aims to provide a methodological 
contribution by providing ways in which to collect and 
organize forum data; as well as empirical insight into how 
and which players engage with religious themes in games , 
re-informing other and earlier (deductive) theoretical work. 
METHOD 
In order to answer these questions, three general methods 
were used. Primarily, we analyzed discussions on the five 
most popular video game forums. These amount to N = 91 
discussion ‘threads’ of between 3 and 576 posts in whic h 
players from various religious and non-religious 
backgrounds discuss the perceived worldview of several 
videogames in light of their own convictions. Secondly, in 
order to gain further and more elaborate qualitative insight 
into these players, a number of forum users were approached 
for additional semi-structured interviews, of which N = 20 
were conducted. Thirdly, the researchers became acquainted 
with all of the digital game titles and series mentioned 
throughout the research, representing an undocumented 
amount of hours of contact with the games’ contents.  The 
approach should be classified as multi-method [25 , 65], 1. Reddit.com (ranked 33)  11. Rockstargames.com (ranked 3154) *single -developer  
2. Gameforge (ranked 317)  12. Eurogamer (ranked 3902)  
3. IGN (ranked 325)   13. Minecraftforum.net (4073) *single -game   
4. Battle.net (ranked 379)  14. Giantbomb (4304)  
5. Gamefa qs (ranked 496)  15. N4G (4905)  
6. Gamespot (ranked 746)  16. Planetminecraft.com (4970) *single -game  
7. Leageoflegends.com (ranked 770) *single -game  17. Rockpapershotgun (5382)  
8. Wowhead (ranked 1557) *single -game  18. Penny -arcade f orums (5604)   
9. NeoGAF (ranked 2099)  18. Game -debate.com (6036)   
10. Minecraft.net (ranked 2900) *single -game  20. Destructoid.com (ranked 6,045)  
Table 1. First ranking of websites for popularity based on data from Alexa.  
 
 
Session 8: Beyond the Typical Player Experience
CHI PLAY 2017, October 15–18, 2017, Amsterdam, NL 
465where the first, second and third method followed each other 
sequentially. A constant comparative method was used 
throughout the process [5, 40, 45]. 
Forum discussions were collected based on a strict four-step 
selection of data. Firstly, page-ranking service Alexa  was 
consulted to rank gaming websites based on traffic data. 
Second, websites were removed that no longer have active 
forums and have not archived them (e.g., PC Gamer , 
Gamesradar , VG247 ); as well as forums focusing on a single 
game or developer (e.g., Leagueoflegends.com, 
Minecraftforum.net , Battle.net ), in order to exclude self-
selection based on religiously-themed games – setting out 
instead to find out which games afford religious discussions 
on open forums. See Table 1  for the resulting ranking. 
Alexa ’s rankings are based on web traffic for the entire 
website. Secondly, for that reason websites were re-ranked 
for traffic only to their forums (e.g., 
‘www.neogaf.com/forum/’ and ‘forums.penny -arcade.com’ 
instead of the full domain), and cross-referenced with three 
other metrics: MozRank , MozPA  and Google’s PageRa nk, all 
of which focus on the use of backlinks, i.e., “other Web pages 
that have a hyperlink pointing to the company of interesting, ” 
[21] rather than page views and unique visitors. 
Thirdly, data was gathered on the selected fora through a 
Google search d eployed from a ‘research browser ,’ i.e., an 
anonymized, non-personalized browser that minimizes the 
customization of search results based on previous search 
activity, according to the practices proposed by the Digital 
Methods Initiative [31]. Google was used to ensure all data 
was gathered consistently across forums, since forums’ 
native search functions are intransparent (it is impossible to 
know whether results are sorted by relevance, date, ‘likes,’ 
[trending] activity, etc.), often divided (per [sub]section ), 
and function differently between fora. Data was collected for 
each forum by prefixing the google string with the operator 
“site:” followed by the url (e.g., 
“site:http://www.ign.com/boards/”). The resulting search 
string entered for each forum’s sit e domain on google was: 
site:[SITEDOMAIN ]+religio*+OR+spiritual*+OR+bel
ief+OR+Christ *+OR+muslim*+OR+islam*+OR+hind*  
The reasoning behind each element is such: in order to 
answer how players discuss religious elements in games, 
threads should contain menti on of either ‘religion,’ 
‘spirituality’ or ‘belief;’ or explicit ly mention one of the 
three major world religions (Christianity, Islam or Hinduism ) 
or their followers. Additional religious positions (e.g., 
agnostic, pagan) were tried and were observed not to affect 
search results – despite being well-represented within 
discussions – and were thus deemed unnecessary for the 
formal search string. The wildcard ‘*’ replaces inflections, 
affixes and compounds so that ‘religio*’ returns ‘religious,’ 
‘religion,’ ‘religiously,’ and so on (as for ‘Christ*/ -ian/-
ianity,’ etc.).  
Fourth, up to the first twenty threads were selected, ignoring 
those unrelated to religion (e.g., “religiously” to describe enthusiasm or addiction) and religious groups (e.g., “Hindi” 
to denote language, “Hindu” as geographical -cultural 
identifier). These were archived as PDFs and coded through 
inductive content analysis [48 ]. Informed consent was not 
deemed necessary [13, 64]: players posted anonymously on 
public forums, according to the terms and conditions for that 
forum ’s publication of their posts.  
As a second method, some groups were deemed relevant but 
requiring more data during collection, according to a 
constant comparative method [5 , 40, 45]. Forum users in 
these groups were approached for further qualitative 
interviews in order to gather insight into the motivations, 
beliefs and social positions behind their online post. In other 
words: to further question the person behind the forum 
discussant. Of the users approached, N = 20 semi-st ructured 
interviews were conducted with users from various religious 
backgrounds. 
DISCUSSING WORLDVIEW IN VIDEO GAMES 
Forum discussions are well-organized, if not always civil, 
conversations. As described above, when users assemble on 
a forum to discuss religion in games, the forum acts as a 
specific communicative context by both technologically 
mediating conversation (allowing users to register under 
nicknames and post in threaded conversations) as well as by 
enabling those users to create a culture of hierarchical, 
codified discussion. Long-standing forums usually have an 
extensive list of rules for proper etiquette, and their 
heterogeneous player communities put forward 
administrators to govern their forums.  
In the context of this paper, one pertinent example of forum 
culture is that, on all the forums included in the data set, 
religious discussions were referred to as recurring, 
conflictual and generally unpleasant. As one user on 
GameSpot  commented: “ I think it [i]s strange that most of 
Offtopic is religion based… either we have a LOT of curious 
people or we have LOTS of people that like to ruffle 
feathers. ” A thread about the upcoming release of Assassin’s 
Creed 2 on another forum, GameFAQs , was outright titled 
“Am I the only one not looking forward to the religious 
arguments bound to ensue? ” Of course, in this attempt to 
keep people from repeating the same kinds of discussions, 
the thread quickly turns into a religious debate. In the same 
thread, another user adds that 
“They will always find something or someone to vent 
their anger towards. I can remember reading posts 
about Doom 3  in '04, from Christians worried they were 
going to hell for playing a game with demons. The best 
thing to is ignore it. If the topic is hinting towards that, 
ignore it and find something else to read.”  
Signposting 
Another general feature of these discussions of religion in 
games, which greatly helped us contextualize our analysis, is 
how adamant users are to indicate their own religious 
positions. Posts very frequently included a kind of 
‘signposting,’ an announcement of that user’s religion, e.g.: 
Session 8: Beyond the Typical Player Experience
CHI PLAY 2017, October 15–18, 2017, Amsterdam, NL 
466“I'm christian and  […],” “ I'm devoutly religious, but  
seriously…, ” and equally: “ As an atheist ,” “Full disclosure, 
I'm not a religious person, ” or “ That plot sounds kind of 
badass to be honest but I'm not a religious person so what do 
I know ” (See Figure 1). Such pre- and affixing of posts with 
the religious position of the user has two consequences: 
firstly, it makes it easier for readers to get an idea of what 
perspective is behind the post – whether those readers are 
other forum users or academics analyzing thousands of such 
posts. Secondly, it may be used as a rhetorical device to 
indicate nuance (“but I’m not a religious person  so what do I 
know”) or authenticity (“ I'd consider myself a pretty devout 
Muslim. My religion actually does affect the way I play ”); 
while keeping opinions segregated and entrenched, thereby 
enabling users to present their identities as relatively stable , 
while simultaneously allowing readers to freely agree with 
or ignore posts merely based on the position of who wrote it. 
GAMES FOR DISCUSSION 
Which games actually prompt religious debate? Based on the 
discussions found, we were able to form a list of the game 
series which were most frequently referred to, by coding for 
titles as they occurred (Table 2). Threads are ordered by the 
amount of discussions (forum threads) they appeared in. The 
bottom three game series in the table occupied a shared spot, 
getting an equal amount of mentions. 
This indication of games serves a few purposes. First, it 
informs future research: it provides a list of inductively 
grounded case studies, as opposed to the theoretical (and 
often opportunistic) sampling approach taken for case 
studies by theologians, sociologists and other cultural 
researchers up to this point [e.g., 12, 64, 71]. Second, it 
informed, directly, our own method in this project: these 
games were given precedence in following content analyses, 
and were prioritized in order to facilitate analysis of the 
forum discussions below, as well as the following interviews, 
all the better to understand what participants were talking 
about.  Thirdly, the list of games gives a first insight into which 
game series and genres provide the opportunities for 
discussions of religiosity. Several types can be distinguished: 
Firstly, games such as Assassin’s Creed  and BioShock  
present kinds of ‘alternate histories’ in which religion has not 
lost its central role, but is combined with modern regimes 
and technologies; or alternatively, is traced through the ages 
in a narrative of ‘what if,’ i.e., what if secular developments 
had not occurred and religious orders are (secretly) in power 
(e.g., BioShock: Infinite ; or the Templars in Assassin’s 
# Game (series)  Threads 
(N=91)  
1 Final Fantasy (Square Enix, 1987 —) 27 
2 Assassin’s Creed (Ubisoft, 2007 —) 22 
3 BioShock (Irrationa l, 2007 —) 22 
4 Xeno(gears/ -saga/ -blade) ( Takahashi , 
1998 —) 20 
5 (Shin) Megami Tensei [2]—) 17 
6 Dante’s Inferno [34] 16 
7 Dark Souls (FromSoftware. 20 11—) 15 
8 Dragon Age (BioWare, 2009 —) 9 
9 The Elder Scrolls (Bethesda, 1994 —) 8 
9 The Binding of Isaac (Edmund [64] 8 
9 Devil May Cry (Capcom, 2001 —) 8 
Table 2. Game series and their developers, ordered by the 
number of appearances in unique threads . 
  
Figure 1. Two examples of  anonymized  users signposting their religious positions, on the GameFAQs  forums.  
 
Session 8: Beyond the Typical Player Experience
CHI PLAY 2017, October 15–18, 2017, Amsterdam, NL 
467Creed ). Secondly, game series such as Final Fantasy , The 
Elder Scrolls  (including Skyrim ), Dragon Age , Shin Megami 
Tensei and Xenogears  present fantasy worlds in which gods 
are often provided as reasons for magic, incentives for quests 
and other variably mundane interactions. Japanese fantasy 
(e.g., Final Fantasy, Shin Megami Tensei, Dark Souls ) 
presents an especially interesting case because of its frequent 
reliance on imagery from world religion, used eclectically: 
Lucifer, Yahweh, Quetzalcoatl, Shiva and others are freely 
appropriated from Judaic, Christian, Meso-American, 
Hindu, Shinto, Egyptian and other mytho-theological 
traditions. Thirdly and fourthly, The Binding of Isaac and 
Dante’s Inferno  provide two outliers. While both ground 
their narrative basis in Christian literary intertextuality (the 
Bible and Dante’s Divina Commedia, respectively), they are 
mechanically different: The Binding of Isaac  is an 
autobiographical roguelike based on the creator ’s own 
childhood traumas with Christian parents , Dante’s Inferno  is 
a third-person action-adventure which possibly deserves its 
own classification: within the same genre, popular 
alternatives God of War, Devil May Cry  and lesser-known 
Viking: Battle for Asgard provide the same ‘beat them all’ 
game-play while drawing on different (Greco-Roman, 
Japanese demonic, Norse) pantheons [79, 17, 24]. More 
i
mportantly, what did players find ‘religious’ about these 
games, and with what attitudes did they approach this 
religiosity? 
ATTITUDES TOWARD RELIGIOUS CONTENTS 
Throughout discussions of these games we found four typical 
attitudes toward what they recognized as religious content in 
digital games. These ideal-typical attitudes will be set forth 
below: Rejecting, Debunking, Debating and Connecting. An 
overview of the types should show, first and foremost, an 
intensity of engagement with games’ content on the axis 
from Rejecting to Connecting. Underlying these, are four 
attitudes along this axis of engagement which we wish to 
represent below. That is, of Rejecting as a type of 
disengagement with fictions that are perceived to challenge 
one’s worldview. Debunking as a way of trivializing fiction 
to be ‘actually’ irrelevant to a non -fictional world. Debating 
as a mobilization of games’ formal properties to support 
one’s interpretation. As well as, finally, of C onnecting as a 
willingness to seek out and engage with opposite worldviews 
through fascination, understanding and empathy.  
1. Rejecting 
Some users choose to reject any game that disagrees with 
their own worldview. Rejecters can be found on all sides and 
variations of belief. Rejecting a game can be vocal and total, 
stating for instance, that “[t]his game [ Doom ] is worthless 
and is satanic. Jesus died on the cross to defeat Satan and the 
power of Sin,” or leading to personal calls to warn other 
believers: 
“Anyone who is a servant of CHrist [ sic] will stay far 
away from this Satanic game. Be warned this game is 
not of God or from God but from Satan. It's seen in the 
advertizing and in the actual game itself.  In Christ, 
Andrew”  
Rejecters refuse to play a game when it endorses a worldview 
that disagrees with theirs. In a way, what fundamentally 
distinguishes ‘rejecting’ as an attitude from the second 
attitude below (‘debunking’) is that it takes the content of the 
game seriously, despite wishing to completely disengage 
with it. Rejecting is not an attitude solely for believers. One 
presumably atheist or agnostic forum user states:  
“All I'm saying is that I can't relate to someone who's 
religious, and if I'm supposed to bond with this 
character and ‘go on a journey’ with him, I just, I can't 
and I'm not interested in doing so.”  
What is difficult about rejecting as an attitude on public 
forums, is that because the player does not want anything to 
do with the game – in many cases to not even buy it based on 
advertising or word of mouth – they seldom speak up about 
it. In order to gain more insight into players rejecting games’ 
religious contents, we contacted and actively sought out 
some of these forum users for further interviews. 
Greg, for example, a Jehovah’s wit ness, felt alienated by 
representations of atheism and (other) religions, remarking 
that his religious life outright “limits what I play :” he stays 
away from violence, demons, and games like God of War and 
Devil May Cry that feature “un -Christian” content  [79, 17]. 
Religion, he claimed, was usually revealed in games to be 
“window dressing :” mundane, irrelevant or it simply “ turns 
out to be alien technology .” Ali, a Dutch -Moroccan Muslim, 
felt similarly that, although “ heathen content is inescapable, 
you’ll have to deal with it if you want to play games,” which 
increasingly lead him to just not play them altogether. He 
referred to games like Uncharted, which uses “ pagan 
symbols ” [66], the “ satanic content ” of the Doom  series [51], 
and so on (Ali). This group of players further included 
brothers Dan and Bert, both Christian ministers, who 
resorted to shooting and sports games to enjoy instead. This 
is true for all the ‘rejecters’ we interviewed: while gaming is 
a fun activity for its challenges, game-play and story, the 
latter all too often proved a distracting or even distasteful 
contestation of their beliefs.  
2. Debunking 
Debunking forum posts assert that the religious content of a 
game is essentially hollow or trivial. For religious and non-
religious players alike, debunking is the fundamental 
assertion that their beliefs remain unshaken, regardless of 
what kind of worldview a game confronts them with.  
Debunking, in its simplest form, is familiar to most people – 
and perhaps academics studying games in particular – as “it’s 
just a video game .” In many examples, debunking is a way 
to denounce fiction as having any sway over religious 
beliefs: “ If a work of fiction makes you angry because in their 
fictional universe God maybe did not cause historical events 
that is pretty sad. This is coming from a religious person as 
well. ” By extension, another religious player noted that what 
Session 8: Beyond the Typical Player Experience
CHI PLAY 2017, October 15–18, 2017, Amsterdam, NL 
468religion is ‘about’ is more important than works of fiction, 
such as BioShock: Infinite , in this case:  
“I'm Christian but nothing ab out this game bothered me 
[…] it's a work of fiction made for entertainment, so 
anyone who can have their ideals swayed by a story 
isn't really getting what religion is all about.”  
Forum users like the one quoted above essentially favour the 
truth-value of one text, such as the Bible or other religious 
writing, over another ‘text’ – e.g., B ioShock  – by debunking 
the latter as a fictional text and respecting the former as more 
influential to their worldview. 
In its most extreme cases, the rhetoric of Debunking seeks to 
trivialize the relevance of religious content on the grounds 
that any fictional content is trivial. In a thread, started by a 
religious player asking how atheists respond to religion in 
games, one user responds “ Well, I don't feel affected and no 
one should be… because you know why?... It's just a game!... 
if you feel bad about a game then you have a problem.. .” 
According to another, “ It's just all fantasy to me. I don't have 
a problem with it at all. ” This interpretation of actions and 
stories in games as, in the end, irrelevant to ‘real’ life is 
shared by Christians, as well:  
“I am pretty sure that if you realize it[’]s a game and 
you don't go and commit crimes or live an awful life 
God will understand ;). The other day I was punching 
birds in Crysis  and I would NEVER do that in real life 
:P.”  
In such cases, the rhetoric of debunking holds that it is absurd 
to regard actions and stories in video games, and all fiction 
by extension, as really  having any impact on what people – 
and gods! – think or believe: fiction is irrelevant. Flat theology 
What differentiates the Bible from BioShock , for these 
discussants? Whereas for a large group of (religious) 
Debunkers, religious texts retained a special significance 
over video game fictions; debunking all fiction has further-
reaching implications. For non-religious players specifically, 
this assertion may lead to the (proposed) idea that any game 
or story is entirely fictional and irrelevant – be it in the Bible 
or BioShock , the Quran or Assassin’s Creed , the Dao de jing 
or Dark Souls . “Fantasy fits right in with more fantasy .” 
Many discussions involved debunkers comparing games’ 
fictions to religious stories as equally fictional, and equally 
trivial. Such a position equates to what we henceforth call a 
‘flat theology.’ As one user deftly put it, “ I don't really mind  
[religion in games ], I consider Angels and Demons just the 
same as Trolls and pixies. ” Yet another one asserts, “ I see 
religious elements in games as I see them in reality: it's a 
bunch of myths and legends that make good stories. ” 
3. Debating 
Debating, as opposed to Rejecting and Debunking, can only 
happen when players engage explicitly with interpretations 
of the game. Some of the most concise statements of the 
rhetoric of Debating  are made in reply to Debunking. One 
user replies to a Debunking post (which stated that “ It’s just 
a game, don’t take it too seriously ”), by expressing their 
dislike for such trivialization: “ You know, I don't like this. 
Just because something is a game/movie/show or w/e one 
shouldn't dismiss the message it tries to convey .” Another 
user explains his own decision to take a game ( Bayonetta  
[76]) seriously, when considering that even though  
“Bayonetta  doesn't take itself seriously, [that] doesn't 
mean that it's not seri ous. […] I know it's just a game, 
a good game, but the underlying themes of the game do 
give me a little bit of a chill when I play it.”   
Figure 2. Excerpt from two anony mized users Debating Link's religiosity on IGN.com. Various abbreviations refer to different 
games in the Zelda series [70]. 
 
Session 8: Beyond the Typical Player Experience
CHI PLAY 2017, October 15–18, 2017, Amsterdam, NL 
469What gave them “ a little bit of a chill ” was that “ killing 
angels or any religious metaphor can be a [n] offensive thing 
to some people, ” stressing that “ whether it’s offensive or not 
can be subjective. ” 
That interpretations of games can be ‘subjective’ at all is an 
important way in which the rhetoric of Debating differs from 
Rejecting and Debunking. Games, according to these users, 
have meaning: they can be offensive to some and fascinating 
to others. Debating users take games seriously by analysing 
them as meaningful artefacts – and engaging in vigorous 
debates about what  they mean. Players freely mobilize 
themes and references for their arguments – e.g., “ It's filled 
with religious references anyway. The Ark, the Covenant, the 
Flood... Hell, even the game is called  Halo ” [15] – as well as 
authorial arguments: “ I know that Darksiders has no 
religious undertones because the developers said it doesn't. ” 
Many debates concern the beliefs and opinions of game 
‘authors’ such as Ken Levine, Hideo Kojima, or Ubisoft’s 
‘religious disclaimer.’  
An elaborate example should illustrate debates like these, by 
representing a part of a specific discussion on whether Link 
– the protagonist of the Zelda  series [69] —) – is Catholic. 
The participants mount various arguments which employ 
both a detailed knowledge of the formal properties of Zelda 
games across the series, as well as their cultural and historical 
contexts ( Figure 2).  
The specific form of the forum is clear: messages are 
presented chronologically, discussants remain more or less 
anonymous (pseudonymous), and the discussion goes on a-
synchronously. The debate continues for 36 more posts, with 
additional users pointing out other religious symbols in the 
game, including discussion of Aztec, Egyptian, Mayan, 
Muslim, Christian elements, as well as the game’s own 
mythology, introduced in later games. These formal 
elements of the game range from visual icons to ludic 
elements – such as the “‘Book of Magic’ [item] in the first 
game, which had a cross on it, and is called ‘Bible’ [ バイブル ] 
in the Japanese version”  (Figure 3 ). It further includes a 
number of narrative, musical, authorial and even paratextual 
or ‘paraludic ’ sources: a large part of the initial debate 
surrounds a picture of Link praying to Jesus and Mary in a 
church, which was taken from an official Japanese guide to 
the game by Nintendo. 
This kind of ‘pop semiotics,’ in which players engage in 
light-hearted, sometimes associative analyses of the games 
they play, mobilizes knowledge from both games and 
religion. Debates often point to a wide familiarity with games 
for comparison (“ I do find it interesting that basically every 
game that tackles religion seems anti­religion  [such as] 
Assassin's Creed, F[inal]F[antasy]X, Xenogears, etc.”). 
Furthermore, debates point to an extensive knowledge of 
religions, as well: the aforementioned discussion on Zelda 
touches on a range of religious topics, including the history 
of certain icons (the crescent moon, the cross) and the 
variations of feathered serpents in Mesoamerican mythologies, be they called Quetzalcoatl, Kuulkulkan or 
otherwise. All to either prove – or ridicule – the idea that the 
Zelda games contain religion; and the same debates occur for 
nearly all the games we found. 
Finally, Debating shows that no matter how formally users 
engage with the text, interpretations are never final, but 
indeed ‘subjective,’ as stated by the forum user above. 
Debaters frequently argue for entirely mutually exclusive 
interpretations of the same game – usually following their 
contrary religious beliefs. Hence, Assassin’s Creed is at the 
same time a Christia n game “ against the illuminaties, the 
knight templars and the anti-christ ” while other users argue 
that the game definitely “ did imply that religion is false ,” and 
that  
“The idea that laws do not come from Divinity but 
common sense and that the miracles in religious texts 
were accomplished due to mind control. […] that's a 
VERY strong anti- religious sentiment.”  
The protagonist of Assassin’s Creed 2 , i.e., “ the main 
character of ACII (Ezio) is a damned Catholic himself ,” 
while yet another user stresses that the game is secular, in 
accordance with its historical period: “ Renaissance Italy was 
the period of Humanism- secular, secular, secular. They 
portrayed it accurately, pack up your bible and go 
somewhere else .” Similarly, BioShock: Infinite  both shows 
that “societies without faith fail in the long run because of a 
lack of morality ;” while to other players it is “ is one big ‘anti -
religious’ aspect. ” While the game is frequently analyzed by 
academics and critics as a criticism of American 
Protestantism, one forum user argued instead that: 
“The game does a good job of emphasizing how the 
core values of religion are quite beautiful […] Love, 
community, redemption are all concepts the game looks 
at fondly […] By the time you reach the end of the 
game, it's about people. Any vestiges of religious 
commentary are, by that point, positive.”  
Debating, while a more serious engagement with games’ 
religious contents than Rejecting or Debunking, all too often 
devolves into a stalemate. In many cases, players such as 
those above end up entrenched within their own 
interpretation, appropriating the meanings of the games 
discussed according to their own religious position – and  
Figure 3. The "Book of Magic" item from The Legend of 
Zelda  [69], called 'Bible' [ バイブル ] in the Japanese 
original.  
 
 
Session 8: Beyond the Typical Player Experience
CHI PLAY 2017, October 15–18, 2017, Amsterdam, NL 
470fundamentally disagreeing on their mutually exclusive 
interpretations of the same game. 
4. Connecting 
Other users actively sought to connect to other worldviews 
than their own. This attitude of Connecting is different from 
Debating in that Connecting players seek engagement with – 
and often get a lasting impression of – a game’s religious 
content, rather than arguing for its agreement with their own 
beliefs. Opposite from Rejecting; Connecting often entails 
actively seeking out such games, for various reasons. One 
reason is that “theistic themes often make for a fantastic work 
of fantasy or fiction,” sugg esting that religious worlds just 
inherently represent quality to some users. Such users 
typically report that they “ even actively look for them ,” 
preferring to seek out game worlds that contain or thematise 
religion. Central among these reasons for Connecting is a 
fascination with other worldviews, in which religious 
characters, fantasy worlds and ritualized spaces present an 
escape from everyday life. Another forum user, who 
introduced his post stating “ Full disclosure, I'm not a 
religious person, ” explains:  
“I enjoy the ‘lore’ surrounding different religions. The 
sense of the unknown, the high strangeness, the 
savagery and difficulty in reconciling the cruelty of the 
world with higher ideals. People using these forces to 
manipulate others, and those that truly seem to have 
good intentions.”  
In this sense, religion is something not found in the ‘normal,’ 
an enchantment of the world that is fascinating precisely due 
to its absence from everyday experience. One agnostic forum 
user who displayed a Connecting attitude was Günther, 
whom we approached to ask what that desire for religious 
escapism came from. He explained finding solace in games’ 
straightforward certainty: “life isn’t handing out feedback as 
willingly as a game does ,” instead “ the results of playe r 
actions in a game are far more often visible and relatable  
[…] I would like for life's choices to be seen as less 
differentiated and nuanced .” Indeed, as another Connecting 
player stated, in a lot of fantasy worlds, faith in gods just 
makes sense, “ since the ones  [i.e., the gods] in video games 
often give good evidence that they exist, the people in those 
games’ universes have ample reason to be theists .” As 
similar qualitative research has demonstrated, “ within the 
boundaries of the game world, self-proclaimed atheists can 
safely experiment with the ultimate meanings of (religious) 
worldviews ,” in which gods exist unambiguously [80]. 
Such desire and fascination is of course not exclusive to 
irreligious players; and indeed religious and irreligious 
players alike joined discussions by stating that they came 
into meaningful contact with other belief systems. One 
forum user shares “ I'm a Taoist, and yet I enjoy RPG games 
and the like, many of which feature Christian themes. This 
doesn't bother me. The bible is filled with tales that are ripe 
1 In Mass Effect [8], and Assassin’s Creed  [93], respectively. for gaming adaptation. ” Two other examples include Geoff 
who came into contact with gurus and meditation as a child 
playing Faxanadu  [49], which presented him with such a 
fascinating “ different way of thinking about religion than 
[he] had so far had […] being raised catholic and going to 
Sunday school ” that he would later “ cobble together [his] 
own version kind of a spirituality, ” inspired by Eastern 
religions, New Age and spending much of his life playing 
games that allowed his “b ecoming aware of the existence of 
other belief systems. And that prompts a questioning of one’s 
own belief system ” (Geoff). By comparison, Methodist -
raised-turned-atheist James was reminded of the personal 
side of religion by playing That Dragon, Cancer [41], which 
includes the player in the designers’ struggle with their 
fatally ill child. For James, the game’s  emphasis on 
“struggling with religion and questioning it […] 
humaniz[ed] religious people […] and then creating 
empathy for them ,” caus ed him to take a more empathic look 
at the Christianity he had rejected in adolescence (James).  
These encounters with other religious worlds and 
worldviews can be instructive and even convincing. Another 
interviewed participant explains her intriguing ‘meeting ’ 
with God in Dragon’s Dogma  [18], which led her to think 
about her own religiosity: “ once you get to meet God, you 
learn God's been pulling the strings all along ;” making her 
wonder whether, outside of the game, “ it's possible that I’m 
only aware of the 'appearance' of God's non-interaction 
when in reality God could be intervening in a way that's not 
immediately discernible ” (Joan). Such thought experiments 
are typical among players that positioned themselves as 
actively connecting to other-religious content. Another 
interviewed participant who, despite being a convinced 
atheist, wrote about playing a religious Sheppard and Altaïr,1 
shared his game-induced doubt in the interview stating:  
“What if I’m wrong? What is the game trying to make 
me think about? Just by being on the topic of religion 
[it] does make me question... I constantly question my 
worldview and, you know , whether I‘m right or wrong. 
It makes me think: is this how people in the real world 
use religion?”  
Seeking out, trying to empathize with and understand 
religious worldviews can lead to games changing their 
players’ convictions. We contacted one user who had written 
that “ Persona 4: Golden  made me a better person ,” 
explaining how it helped him realize and come to terms with 
the fact "that I w as not religious at all. That I was the ‘a’ -
word, the one reserved for baby-eaters and neckbeards.” 
Another user, identifying himself as a “ secular humanist ” 
shared in a thread on Assassin’s Creed  and atheism that 
“Thinking back to playing these games I can't help but 
realize that they probably played at least a small portion in 
my deconversion. They're some of my favorite games .” One 
of them, when asked in an interview to elaborate, also 
Session 8: Beyond the Typical Player Experience
CHI PLAY 2017, October 15–18, 2017, Amsterdam, NL 
471explained that he “ deconverted ” from Christianity, aided by 
seeking o ut games which “showed me it was okay to be an 
atheist” (Phil). Throughout our interview, he stressed the role 
that games such as Persona 4 [2], Undertale  [91], and others 
played in showing him the joy of personal investment and 
individual choice that games can celebrate without having to 
rely on faith (“ religious iconography and figured are used, 
but they are  […] shown more as myth than fact, rooted in 
people  […] shown to be manifestations of human nature ” 
[Phil]. Using the ending to Persona 4  as an example, he 
explained:  
“The people  you gained social links from call out to 
you with encouragement, the music swells in just the 
right way, and you toss aside your glasses to see the 
world how it truly is -- which is what you make of it.” 
(Phil)  
In all, what makes Connecting, as an attitude toward 
religious representation in video games, different from the 
other attitudes found in online discussions, is this willingness 
to seek out other worldviews and connect to the way they are 
represented in video games. By doing so, players in many 
cases succeed in not just finding interest in them, but at 
internalizing other ways of thinking and believing – be it 
temporarily or lastingly. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper set out to inductively find and analyze how 
players engage with religion through the technological and 
theological affordances of digital games and online forums. 
Perhaps unexpectedly, they turn out to do so in various ways 
and for various reasons.  
On the basis of a wide selection of 91 online discussions, 
several gam es present what could be called ‘theological 
affordances,’ that is  (borrowing somewhat from Davidsen’s 
research into “fiction -based” Tolkien -inspired religion [28]) , 
that these games afford groups of players to discuss the 
religious meanings of these games, of the religions alluded 
to, and of the nature of religion. In this sense, the research 
firstly contributes an inductive list of games that, much like 
Gibson’s and Norman’s affordances suggest [38, 71], are 
designed to afford a certain use: the reflection on religion and 
ultimate meaning, even among secular consumers. Such an 
inductive list may serve to replace, on empirical basis, the 
opportunistic and theoretical sampling of case studies that 
have been taken within the field of games and religion. 
Secondly, these forums show specific technological 
affordances. The specific form of chronological, a-
synchronous, threaded conversations shapes discussion, e.g., 
by driving many players (specifically those taking 
‘Debating’ attitudes ) into entrenched positions – from which 
the same game can be interpreted in mutually exclusive 
ways: e.g., of religious and irreligious interpretive 
communities understanding Bibles in Zelda or religion in 
BioShock: Infinite as portrayed in accordance with both 
groups’ mutually exc lusive convictions. The technological 
affordance of pseudonymity, while turning out less relevant to the eventual analysis and theorization of the data, is 
present throughout, and undoubtedly influences the tone, 
extremity of positions and the length of the discussions when 
compared to other platforms (such as Facebook  or other 
social media). 
Finally, this paper’s main contribution is in providing both 
the empirical basis for the ascertainment that players actually 
engage in such discussions, confirming mos t of the content-
based work on games and religion from other disciplines; as 
well as providing analysis of how players engage in these 
discussions. To this end, the paper proposes four ideal-types: 
Rejecters who refuse to confront media which (is expected 
to) present other worldviews. Debunkers who trivialize the 
meaning of fiction and interactive systems, in many cases 
espousing a ‘flat theology’ in which all mediatized 
supernatural beings – whether digital or in holy texts – are 
equally fictional and trivial. Debaters who engage in 
elaborate formal discussion on properties of games and 
religion, mobilizing knowledge of both under the assumption 
that fiction is both relevant to their convictions, and has a 
stable meaning in accordance therewith. Connectors were 
recognized as those players who engaged with games to play 
with worldviews, in most cases by seeking out different 
(world-religious or fictional) worldviews as a compelling 
fantasy outside of agnosticism and atheism; or as a way to 
engage with other-religious worldviews. 
In all, the research opens up possibilities for further research: 
outside of forums, the question still remains how players 
from different religious backgrounds engage differently (or 
similarly) with the theological and technological affordances 
of games. Furthermore, insight is left to be gained into how 
these worldviews function. What happens when players are 
confronted or convinced with other ways of viewing the 
world? Are there qualitative differences between the 
provision of ‘ultimate meaning’ by digital games; and texts 
such as the Bible or Quran? While empirical and theoretical 
work is thus left to be done, this paper provides the basis for 
a strange possibility: that faith and ritual may be displaced – 
perhaps for just a few nightly hours a week – to the realm of 
digital play. 
REFERENCES 
1. Atlus. 1987. Megami Tensei . Game [Famicon]. 
2. Atlus. 2008. Shin Megami Tensei: Persona 4. Game 
[PlayStation 2] . 
3. Aupers, S., & Houtman, D. 2006. Beyond the spiritual 
supermarket: The social and public significance of new 
age spirituality. Journal of contemporary religion , 212, 
201-222.  
4. Aupers, S., & Schaap, J. 2015. Beyond Belief. Playing 
with Pagan Spirituality in World of Warcraft. Online-
Heidelberg Journal of Religions on the Internet , 7. 
5. Aupers, S., Schaap, J., & de Wildt, L. 2017. Qualitative 
In-depth Interviews: Studying Meaning-Making and 
Religious Reflexivity in MMOs. in Šisler, V., Radde -
Antweiler, K. & Zeiler, X. Games, Gods and Gamers: 
Session 8: Beyond the Typical Player Experience
CHI PLAY 2017, October 15–18, 2017, Amsterdam, NL 
472Methods for Studying Video Games and Religion . 
London: Routledge. 
6. Berger, P.L., Berger, B. & Kellner, H. 1973. The 
Homeless Mind: Modernization and Consciousness . 
Random House 
7. Bethesda Game Studios. 1994. The Elder Scrolls . 
Game [Personal Computer] 
8. Bioware. 2007. Mass Effect . Game [Xbox 360]. 
9. Bioware. 2009. Dragon Age . Game [PlayStation 3]. 
10. Bioware. 2014. Dragon Age: Inquisition . Game 
[PlayStation 3]. 
11. Bogost, I. 2007.  Persuasive games: The expressive 
power of v ideogames . Cambridge: MIT Press.  
12. Bosman, F.G. 2015. ‘Playing God’. Online-Heidelberg 
Journal of Religions on the Internet , 7. 
13. Bourgonjon, J., Wever, B.D., Soetaert, R., & Valcke, 
M. 2015. Players’ perspectives on the positive impact 
of video games. New Media and Society , 11, 1–18. 
14. Braithwaite, A. 2014. ‘Seriously, get out’: Feminists on 
the forums and the War (craft) on women. New Media 
& Society , 16,5: 703-718. 
15. Bungie. 2001. Halo . Game [Xbox]. 
16. Campbell, H.A. and Grieve, G.P. eds., 2014.  Playing 
with religi on in digital games . Indiana University 
Press.  
17. Capcom. 2001. Devil May Cry . Game [PlayStation 2] 
18. Capcom. 2012.  Dragon’s Dogma . Game [PlayStation 
3] 
19. Caputo, J.D., Vattimo, G., & Robbins, J.W. 2007. After 
the death of God . Columbia University Press. 
20. CD Projekt RED. 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt . 
Game [PlayStation 4].  
21. Chau, M., Shiu, B., Chan, I., & Chen, H. 2007. Redips: 
Backlink search and analysis on the Web for business 
intelligence analysis.  Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Tec hnology , 58(3), 351 -
365. 
22. Chess, S., & Shaw, A. 2015. A conspiracy of fishes, or, 
how we learned to stop worrying about #GamerGate 
and embrace hegemonic masculinity. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media , 591, 208-220. 
23. Clark, L.S., 2005.  From angels to  aliens: Teenagers, 
the media, and the supernatural . Oxford University 
Press on Demand.  
24. Creative Assembly. 2007. Viking Battle for Asgard . 
Game [PlayStation 3] 
25. Creswell, J. W., & Clark, V. L. P. 2007 . Designing and 
conducting mixed methods research. 
26. Cusack, C. 2010. Invented Religions: Imagination, 
Fiction and Faith , Farnham/Burlington: Ashgate. 27. Davidsen, M.A., 2014. The spiritual Tolkien milieu: a 
study of fiction ‐based religion  (Doctoral dissertation, 
Leiden Center for the Study of Religion, Faculty of the 
Humanities, Leiden University).  
28. Davidsen, M. A. 2016. The religious affordance of 
fiction: a semiotic approach.  Religion , 46,4: 521-549.  
29. de Koster, W. 2010. ‘Nowhere I could talk like that’: 
Togetherness and identity on online forums.  PhD 
dissertation, Erasmus University, Rotterdam  
30. Detweiler, C. ed., 2010. Halos and avatars: Playing 
video games with god . Westminster John Knox Press.  
31. Digital Methods Initiative. 2015. The Research 
Browser. Video. 1 June 2015. Retrieved April 14, 2017 
from 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bj65Xr9GkJM 
32. Eidos Montreal. 2011. Deus Ex: Human Revolution . 
Game [PlayStation 3]. 
33. Electronic Arts. 2010. Dante’s Inferno . Game 
[PlayStation 3] 
34. Firaxis. 2016.  Civilization VI . Game [Personal 
Computer].  
35. Fish, S.E. 1976. Interpreting the “Variorum.”  Critical 
Inquiry , 2,3: 465-485.  
36. FromSoftware. 2011. Dark Souls . Game [PlayStation 
3] 
37. Geraci, R.M. 2014 . Virtually Sacred: Myth and 
Meaning in World of Warcraft and Second Life . Oxford 
University Press. 
38. Gibson, James J. 1979. The Ecological Approach to 
Visual Perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin 
Company. 
39. Glaser, B.G. and Strauss, A. . 1967. The discovery of 
ground theory.  Alpine, New York . 
40. Golding, D. and Van D eventer, L.  2016.  Game 
Changers . Simon and Schuster.  
41. Green, R. 2016. That Dragon, Cancer.   
42. Hamilton, M.B. 2000. An analysis of the festival for 
Mind-Body-Spirit. In S. Sutcliffe & M. Bowman 
(Eds.), Beyond new Age: Exploring alternative 
spirituality  pp. 188 –200. Edinburgh: Edinburgh UP. 
43. Heidegger, M. 1943 [1977]. The Word of Nietzsche: 
'God is Dead.' Lovitt, W. (ed.) The Question 
Concerning Technology and Other Essays . London: 
Garland. 
44. Holton, J. A. 2008. Grounded theory as a general 
research methodology. The grounded theory 
review , 7(2), 67-93. 
45. Hoover, S. 2006. Religion in the Media Age . London, 
New York: Routledge. 
Session 8: Beyond the Typical Player Experience
CHI PLAY 2017, October 15–18, 2017, Amsterdam, NL 
47346. Hornbeck, R.G. 2012. A pure world: moral cognition 
and spiritual experiences in Chinese World of 
Warcraft (Doctoral dissertation, University of Oxford). 
47. Houtman, D., & Aupers, S. 2010. Religions of 
Modernity: Relocating the Sacred to the Self and the 
Digital. Religions of Modernity : pp. 1-30. Leiden: Brill. 
48. Hsieh, H.F., & Shannon, S. E. 2005. Three approaches 
to qualitative content analysis. Qualitative Health 
Research , 15, 9: 1277– 1288. 
49. Hudson Soft. 1987. Faxanadu. 
50. Huizinga, J. 1938. Homo Ludens: Proeve eener 
Bepaling van het Spel-Element der Cultuur [Homo 
Ludens: a Study of the Play-Element in Culture] . 
Haarlem: Tjeenk Willink. 
51. Id Software. 1993. Doom . Game [Personal Computer]. 
52. Infinity Ward. 2007. Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare . 
Game [PlayStation 3]. 
53. Irrational Games. 2013. BioShock: Infinite . Game 
[PlayStation 3]. 
54. Kafai, Y.B., Tynes, B.M. and Richard, G.T., 
2016.  Diversifying Barbie and Mortal K ombat: 
Intersectional Perspectives and Inclusive Designs In 
Gaming . Lulu Press, Inc.  
55. Kollock, P., & Smith, M. (Eds.). (2002). Communities 
in cyberspace . Routledge. 
56. Krzywinska, T. 2006. Blood Scythes, Festivals, Quests, 
and Backstories: World Creation and Rhetorics of 
Myth in World of Warcraft. Games and Culture , 1(4, 
383–396.  
57. Luckmann, T. 1967. The Invisible Religion . Macmillan. 
58. Luckmann, T. 1979. The Structural Conditions of 
Religious Consciousness in Modern Societies. 
Japanese Journal of Religious Studies , 121 –137. 
59. Lyon, D. 2000. Jesus in Disneyland: Religion in 
Postmodern Times. Oxford: Polity Press. 
60. Marx, K. 1848 [1964]). Economic and Philosophic 
Manuscripts of 1844 . New York: International 
Publishers. 
61. Massanari, A., 2017. # Gamergate and The Fappening: 
How Reddit’s algorithm, governance, and culture 
support toxic technocultures.  New Media & 
Society , 19(3), pp.329 -346. 
62. Masso, I.C., & Abrams, N. 2014. Locating the 
Pixelated Jew. In Campbell, H. A., & Grieve, G. P. 
(Eds.). Playing with Religion in Digital Games . Indiana 
University Press: 47-65. 
63. McMillen, E. 2011. The Binding of Isaac . Game 
[Personal Computer]. 
64. Mo, P.K.H., & Coulson, N. 2008. Exploring the 
communication of social support within virtual communities. Cyberpsychology & Behavior , 11(3, 
371–374. 
65. Morse, J.M. (2003). Principles of mixed methods and 
multimethod research design. In A. Tashakkori & C. 
Teddlie (Eds.), Handbook of mixed methods in social 
& behavioral research  (pp. 189-208). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. 
66. Takahashi, T. 1998. Xenogears . Game [PlayStation]. 
67. Naughty Dog. 2007. Uncharted . Game [PlayStation 3]. 
68. Nietzsche, F. 1882 [1974]). The gay science: With a 
prelude in rhymes and an appendix of songs. 
Kaufmann, W. (tr.). NY: Vintage. 
69. Nintendo. 1986. The Legend of Zelda . Game [NES] 
70. Nintendo. 2017. Zelda: Breath of the Wild . Game 
[Nintendo Switch]. 
71. Norman, D. A. 2013. The design of everyday things . 
Basic books. 
72. O'Donnell, J. 2015. A Digit al Devil’s Saga. 
Representation(s) of the Demon in Recent 
Videogames. Online-Heidelberg Journal of Religions 
on the Internet , 7. 
73. Paradox. 2001. Europa Universalis . Game [Personal 
Computer]  
74. Partridge, C. 2004. The Re-Enchantment of the West. 
Volume 1: Alternative Spiritualties , Sacralization, 
Popular Culture, and Occulture . London: T&T Clark 
International. 
75. Perreault, G.P. 2015.  Sacred Space Evaders: Religious 
Hegemony in Gaming Journalism  (Doctoral 
dissertat ion, University of Missouri -Columbia).  
76. Platinum Games. 2009. Bayonetta . Game [PlayStation 
3]. 
77. Possamai, A. 2005. Religion and popular culture: A 
hyper-real testament. Peter Lang. 
78. Santana, R.W., & Erickson, G. 2016.  Religion and 
popular culture: Rescripting  the sacred. McFarland.  
79. Santa Monica Studio. 2005. God of War . Game 
[PlayStation 3].  
80. Schaap, J., & Aupers, S. 2016. ‘Gods in World of 
Warcraft exist’: Religious reflexivity and the quest for 
meaning in online computer games.  new media & 
society , 1461444816 642421.  
81. Shaw, A. 2010. What is video game culture? Cultural 
studies and game studies.  Games and culture , 5,4: 403-
424. 
82. Sicart, M. 2011.  The ethics of computer games . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
83. Sicart, M. 2013.  Beyond choices: The design of ethical 
gameplay . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
Session 8: Beyond the Typical Player Experience
CHI PLAY 2017, October 15–18, 2017, Amsterdam, NL 
47484. Šisler, V. 2008. Digital Arabs: Representation in Video 
Games. European Journal of Cultural Studies , 112. 
85. Šisler, V. 2009. Video Games, Video Clips, and Islam: 
New Media and the Communication of Values. Muslim 
Societies in the Age of Mass Consumption , 231 –258. 
86. Šisler , V. Radde -Antweiler , K. & Zeiler, X. (2017) 
Methods for Studying Video Games and Religion . 
London: Routledge.  
87. Square Enix. 1987. Final Fantasy . Game [NES] 
88. Steffen, O. 2017. Religion in Games: Eine Methode für 
die religionswissenschaftliche Digitalspielforschung 
(Doctoral dissertation). Berlin: Reimer.  
89. Steinkuehler, C.A. 2006. Why game (culture) studies 
now?.  Games and Culture , 11, 97 -102.  
90. Steinkuehler, C.A., & Williams, D. 2006. Where 
everybody knows your (screen) name: Online games as 
“third places”.  Journal of Computer ‐Mediated 
Communication , 11(4, 885-909. 
91. Toby Fox 2015 . Undertale . Game [Personal 
Computer]. 
92. Tolkien, J.R.R. 1939. Tolkien on Fairy -Stories . 
HarperCollins.  
 93. Ubisoft. 2007. Assassin’s Creed . Game [PlayStation 3]. 
94. Wagner, R. 2012.  Godwired: Religion, ritual and 
virtual reality. London: Routledge.  
95. Weber, M. 1919. Science as a Vocation. H.H. Gerth & 
C. Wright Mills (Eds.), From Max Weber: Essays in 
Sociology  (pp. 129 –156). London: Routledge. 
96. Wiemker, M., & Wysocki, J. 2014. ‘When people p ray, 
a god is born... This god is you!’An Introduction to 
Religion and God in Digital Games. Online-Heidelberg 
Journal of Religions on the Internet , 5. 
97. Young, J. 2014.  The Death of God and the Meaning of 
Life. Routledge.  
98. Zagal, J. P. 2009. Ethically notabl e videogames: Moral 
dilemmas and gameplay.  Proceedings of DiGRA 2009 . 
99. Zeiler, X. 2014. The Global Mediatization of Hinduism 
through Digital Games. Playing with Religion in 
Digital Games . Indiana UP: 66 –87 
100. Zijderveld, A.C. 1970. The Abstract Society: A 
Cultural Analysis of Our Time. Doubleday.  
Session 8: Beyond the Typical Player Experience
CHI PLAY 2017, October 15–18, 2017, Amsterdam, NL 
475