Designing an Online Sex Education Resource  
for Gender-Diverse Youth 
Calvin A. Liang1*, Katie Albertson2*, Florence Williams2, David Inwards-Breland4,  
Sean A. Munson1, Julie A. Kientz1, Kym Ahrens2,3 
1Human Centered Design & Engineering, DUB Group, U niversity of Washington  
2Center for Child Health, Behavior and Development, Seattle Children's Research Institute  
3Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington Medicine  
4 Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA  
{cliang02, smunson, jkientz}@uw.edu,  
{Katie.Albertson, Kym.Ahrens}@seattlechildrens.org , fa.williams90@gmail.com, dinwardsbreland@health.ucsd.edu  
ABSTRACT 
Transgender and gender -diverse youth deserve proper sex 
education, but current educational and clinical structures 
largely ignore their developmental experiences. As a result, 
many of these teens go online to seek crucial information. Designers and researchers alike can benefit from an under-
standing of the desi gn needs of gender -diverse youth for sex 
education online resources. We recruited 19 gender -diverse 
youth,  ages 15 to 21 , to participate in a mix of in -person and 
online design methods. This research make s three contribu-
tions; 1) identification of preferen ces for where gender -di-
verse teens prefer to get certain kinds of sexual health  infor-
mation, 2) design considerations for an online resource, 3 a) 
a new method for eliciting preferences, the Four Corners Ex-
ercise, and 3b) a new method  for combining the Asyn chro-
nous Remote Community (ARC) method with in -person ses-
sions. Through this research, we provide key considerations 
in developing an online sex education resource for gender -
diverse youth.  
Author Keywords  
Asynchronous Remote Community (ARC); gender -divers e 
youth; sex education; sexual health 
CSS CONCEPTS  
• Human -centered computing~Interaction design  INTRODUCTION  
Many students across the United States lack access to evi-
dence -based sex education [5, 41] . Further, what is taught 
largely disregards the experiences of transgender (trans) and 
gender -diverse youth (hereafter collectively referred to as 
gender -diverse youth)  [11]. Gender -diverse individuals have 
different needs than their cis -gender peers and have previ-
ously chara cterized school -based sex education as inade-
quate and, at times, harmful [22]. As a consequence of this 
lack of information, they are at higher risk of several nega-
tive health outcomes such as sexually transmitted infections 
(STIs)  and experiencing violence in romantic and sexu al re-
lationships [9, 18, 34] . 
Building upon previous research on what information  gender -
diverse youth seek in sex education, we sought to understand the format in which these  youth prefer to receive sexual health 
information and to understand design considerations  for a po-
tential online, gender -diverse specific sex education resource. 
In this study, we address the following research questions:  
• RQ1: How do gender -diverse  youth prefer to receive sex 
education- related information?  
• RQ2: What role can design and technology play in devel-
oping effective sex education resources for gender -di-
verse youth?  
• RQ3: How can we adapt current participatory design 
methods to gain insight into difficult -to-discuss topics 
like sexual health?  
 To address these questions, we engage d with 19 gender -di-
verse  youth in two focus groups, a three -week Asynchronous 
Remote Community (ARC) study, and a final co -design ses-
sion to understand design requirements of an online sex ed-ucation resource. Our research makes three contributions:  
1. Identif ication of preferences for how gender -diverse  
youth would like to receive different sexual health -related 
information,  
2. Empirical findings for design needs for an online sex ed-
ucation resource for gender -diverse  youth,  and  
* These authors contributed equally.  
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for per-
sonal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distri buted for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components 
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with 
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to 
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request 
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
IDC 2020, June 21 -24, 2020, London, UK . 
© 2020 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication r ights licensed 
to ACM.  ACM ISBN 978 -1-4503- 6708- 0/20/04...$15.00.  
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3392063.33944043. Novel methodological approaches th at can be used to ex-
plore sensitive topics with teens, including a) a new “Four 
Corners” design exercise that builds on the line judging 
method  [43], and b) combining in -person focus groups 
with an online ARC study. 
BACKGROUND  AND RELATED WORK  
Sexual Health Needs of Gender -Diverse Youth 
Gender- diverse  youth — people ages 12 to 21 years old 
whose gender and/or expression does not align with their as-
signed sex at birth — have unique sexual health needs  [31]. 
As others have noted, sexual health for gender -diverse youth 
is more than just sexual behavior; it encompasses intern al 
and social dynamics such as challenges with body image, sexual anatomy, gender dysphoria, disclosing gender to a 
partner, and communicating with a sexual and/or romantic partner [31]. 
Despite the clear need for tailored, gender- affirming sex ed-
ucation resources for gender -diverse  youth, only a few stud-
ies have explored the specific sexual health requirements of 
this group. In a 2019 study, Haley et al. revealed two key 
insights in regard to  what sexual health information gender -
diverse  youth look for and where they get such knowled ge 
[22]. First,  they r eport that  trans and non -binary youth com-
monly receive sexual health information from their schools, healthcare providers, peers, romantic partners, and online sources, but the first two  sources are limited due to irrelevant 
curriculum and varying quality  of interactions with providers 
(including experiences that can be ignorant or even harmful). 
Second, they surfaced eight sexual health content needs de-
scribed by gender- diverse youth: puberty -related gender dys-
phoria, non -medical gender -affirming intervent ions, medical 
gender -affirming interventions, consent and relationships, 
sex and desire, sexually transmitted infection prevention, fer-
tility and contraception, and healthcare access.  
To understand the changes happening in their bodies and how to navigate developing sexualities and their social implica-
tions, many gender -diverse teens go online to find information 
[16, 37] . While some online resources can provide relevant 
information, many are often unvalidated, unmoderated, and some also spread misinformation [22]. Online spaces are  also 
useful testing grounds for many gender -diverse  youth, allow-
ing them to explore their identities, seek information, and connect with others [13, 16, 17, 30, 38] . Given research 
demonstrating that gender -diverse  youth tend to use online 
spaces as resources, there is ample opportunity to identify the 
design need s of such technologies and specific ways gender -
diverse  youth can digitally engage with sexual health topics.  
Designing for and with Youth 
Research with youth presents a unique set of challenges, such as access barriers and communication struggles, but foc us 
groups have proven to be one method for effectively engag-ing with adolescents because they work to rebalance power dynamics, among other reasons [33]. As a result, Interaction 
Design for Children (IDC) research has taken up participa-tory and co- design methods (e.g. , [29, 32] ), with some re-
searchers developing and adapting their own techniques. For 
example, Walsh et al. introduced Line Judging in which par-
ticipants position themselves on a line drawn on the ground 
to reflect their positive or negative preferences for an idea or topic [43]. Line Judging allows participants to express opin-
ions on a spectrum, spatially visualize their choices, and ex-plain to re searchers their rationale for choosing their posi-
tions. Additionally, Guha et al. presented the Mixing Ideas 
method for collaborative brainstorming  [19]. Mixing Ideas 
occurs in three stages: individual idea generation, sharing 
ideas in a small group, and sharing ideas with the whole group. This breakup into three steps helped individual par-
ticipants express and share th eir ideas more freely.  
These methods have been instrumental in developing in-
sights into a wide array of topics such as identity formation 
[10] and cyberbullying interventions [3]. Researchers have 
also used participatory design methods to engage with mar-ginalized youth such as immigrant teens [14], Syrian refugee 
youth [15], and Latina teens [42]. Participatory design meth-
ods are particularly impactful for the ways they enrich the work and give youth a sense of belonging and e mpowerment 
through their participation [35]. These methods have proven 
useful in engaging with marginalized youth because they highlight voices and perspectives typically left out of re-search [28]. However, there is a large gap in addressing de-
sign needs for gender -diverse youth both in IDC and Human -
Computer Interaction more broadly; at the time of this study, 
there were  no studies focusing on trans or gender -diverse  
youth in the ACM Digital Library.  
For studying people who  are difficult to access, the Asyn-
chronous Remote Communities (ARC) method is useful for studying and bringing together participants who might nor-mally be separated by large geographical distances and might 
struggle to find community in their immediate are as, such as 
people with rare diseases [26] and people living with HIV 
[27]. ARC is well-suited  to studying adolescents: given their 
preference for online interventions, it also makes sens e to in-
corporate such preferences into research methods [33]. From 
the IDC community, Bhattacharya et al. us ed the ARC method 
to engage teens in designing new stress management tools [4]. 
Policies for Gender -Diverse Youth 
Within the US, there has been overall  support fo r compre-
hensive sex education in schools, yet a 2016 report showed 
that only 38% of schools covered 19 critical sex education 
topics set by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [8]. While conversations about the state of sex education in 
the US have historic ally forgotten about gender -diverse  
youth, signs of change have begun to emerge. For instance, Healthy People 2020 Adolescent Health’s AH -9 specifically 
addresses sexual orientation and/or gender identity -based 
harassment  [39].Policy is an important consideration alongside practice and 
design [25]. Policies, both governmental and private, can 
have tremendous influence  on groups , such as gender -di-
verse people , who face systematic prejudice . For example , 
several  states  have introduced bills restricting  public school 
participat ion in interscholastic athletic events at which ath-
letes of different biological genders are allowed to participate 
in competition against each other, unless the event specifi-
cally includes both bio logical genders [2]. Such policies can 
limit the participation of and opportunities for trans youth in 
athletics, and they also further normalize discrimination.  
In addition to government policies, platform policies ca n also 
result in promoting health of gender -diverse individuals  and 
discrimination . For example, Haimson et al. describe d Tum-
blr as a “trans technology” for the ways it allowed commu-
nity building among trans users and information sharing. 
However, new policies in December 2018 banned “adult” 
content , which ended up  erasing much trans -related  content , 
thus removing an importa nt resource for its trans users  [21]. 
Policy implementations —whether they are governmental or 
from platforms —the everyday experiences of gender -diverse  
youth, and designs must be considered alongside the policies 
that shape their use . 
METHODS  
Recruitment  
We employed maximum variation purposive sampling [12] 
with the goal of recruiting a diverse sample with a wide variety of ge nder identities across the transgender and gender -diverse 
spectrum.  Participants were recruited from Seattle Children’s 
Gender Clinic  and three community- based organizations in 
the Greater Seattle  area that serve local gender -diverse  
youth. The community o rganizations assisted the study team 
with recruitment by providing study information to youth, re-
ferring interested youth, or allowing research team staff to re-
cruit directly during existing support groups and events.  
Participants 
A total of 19 youth parti cipated in at least one session  who 
ranged from 15 to 21 years old (M=17, stdev=2).  Similar a 
study by  Ahrens et al. , we included  both current adolescents 
and young adults who are just beyond adolescence  to allow 
for reflection on both concurrent and more retrospective  ef-
fects of design considerations  [1]. Because of this age range, 
we hereafter refer to participants as youth. Of the partici-
pants, 5 identified as transgender female, 9 as transgender 
male, 5  as non -binary, 2 as gender fluid, 5 as male, 2 as fe-
male, and 1 as agender (the total exceeds 19 because some participants have more than one gender identity). Our de-
mographics survey mistakenly conflated gender and sex and should have allowed participants to identify with a gender 
rather than a sex (e.g. , trans woman instead of trans female). Initial Focus Groups  
During the first phase of the research study, members of the research team facilitated two initial focus groups (n=7 and 
n=12 ). Each focus group lasted approximately two hours. 
The study team obtained written consent prior to each focus 
group and youth were asked to complete a brief survey con-sisting of questions about demographics and their current 
sources for sexual health inf ormation. After reviewing the 
objective of the research study, the study team used a semi -
structured focus group script to facilitate discussion around the youths’ conceptions of sexual health and how they access 
sexual health information.  Please see Appendix A for the full 
protocol and prompts.  The focus group sessions were video 
recorded with participant consent.  
Following  the semi -structured interview script , we employed 
a new participatory design technique called the Four Corners 
Exercise, which builds upon the line judging technique [43]. 
Four Corners adds an additional dimension to Line Judging 
as well as allow s participants to make different kinds of de-
cisions (i.e., preferences among choices rather than positive 
versus negative reactions). Als o similar to Line Judging, 
Four Corners generates insight into the youth’s preferences 
as they shared their reasoning for choosing a specific posi-tion and, if relevant, why they chose to move.  
In this exercise, researchers labeled each corner of the room with different modes of receiving sexual health information: 
in-person, written, question and answer (Q&A), and videos, 
with the understanding that aspects of these formats may 
overlap or co -exist. These formats or methods of delivering 
sexual health inform ation were decided upon by the research 
team prior to the focus groups based on an extensive explo-ration of existing sexual health resources and prior qualita-tive work [22]. We defined each category as follows: written 
(information that is read , online articles or fact sheets, pam-
phlets, or written articles or factsheets), in- person (1 -on-1 in-
teraction, doctor or provider visit, talking with partner, 
teacher presenting curriculum, or phone hotline), Q&A (text 
chat, FAQ format curated by resource creator or doctor, ask -
me-anythin g format, panel with experts or lived gender -di-
verse  experience), and video (YouTube, other video plat-
forms, videos embedded in articles, or film/TV). Participants 
were also instructed that they could remain in the middle of 
the room if they felt that none  of the corners represented their 
format preference.  
The research team generated a list of content area require-
ments based on a prior qualitative study with gender -diverse 
youth [22]. The topic areas included: 1) STI prevention, 2) 
fertility and contraception, 3) puberty and dy sphoria, 4) sex 
and desire, 5) relationships (consent, boundaries, and disclo-sure). In the first focus group, we asked the youth to place 
themselves in a position in relation to the four formats that 
reflected their preferences for receiving information on  each 
sexual health -related topic. In the second group, we iterated 
on our protocol  by providing  a hypothetical scenario for eachsexual health topic and asked that they place themselves in 
response to that scenario to better help ground the discussion 
around sexual health.  
The Four Corners exercise provided a way for the youth to 
express multiple preferences; for instance, some went di-
rectly to a particular corner while others positioned them-
selves in between two or more corners. Additionally, once all youth had chosen a spot to reflect their preferences, we 
asked each person to  explain their reasoning. Why did they 
choose this particular spot? As each individual gave their 
opinion, some of the others would move  too. The Four Cor-
ners exercise allowed the research team insight into rationale 
for the youth’s preferences not only fr om their initial posi-
tions in the room but also from where and why they moved. 
The youth’s positions were documented after discussion and 
we formed “heat maps” indicative of participant  preferences. 
Heat maps were then summarized and converted into Table 
1. Focus groups were video -recorded, and notes were taken 
during the focus group sessions by study personnel.  
ARC Prompts  
Focus group participants were offered the option to partici-
pate in a follow -up Asynchronous Remote Communities 
(ARC) group on Discord  (https://discordapp.com ) for 1 
month following the focus groups. Previous ARC studies have used Facebook [26] and Slack [4], but we used Discord 
because it similarly allows for communication in private 
online channels and because of its popularity among this age group and among gender -diverse  youth. We set up separate 
“servers” for each focus group, and there were 6 youth in the 
first gro up and 10 in the second. We asked participants to 
work on a weekly  activity for three weeks, and  we estimated 
each would take 20 minutes to finish. Participants were given 
$10 per weekly activity.  
We designed a mix of divergent and convergent thinking prom pts to either generate new ideas or choose and refine 
existing ideas respectively. Convergent and divergent think-ing strategies are both necessary for creative thinking and for socially meaningful solutions [44], and thus we included ac-
tivities that worked both forms.  Appendix A includes f urther 
details about each activity.  The three activities were:  
1. Posting drawings or descriptions of their ideal sexual 
health resources, with or without the use of technology 
(divergent thinking prompt),  
2. Evaluating three existing sexual health or health re-
sources chosen by the study team because of their repre-
sentation of a variety of formats and designs: 
Transgender Teen Survival Guide Tumblr, the Clue Sex Blog, and they2ze (convergent thinking prompt), and  
3. Designing their ideas for a technology -based sexua l 
health resource (prompts included both divergent and convergent thinking components).  Co-Design Session 
Approximately 6 weeks after the final ARC group con-cluded, the authors met with 4 participants who had also been 
involved with the focus groups and ARC study for an in -per-
son co -design session of an online sexual health platform. All 
previous focus group participants were invited, but we 
sought a smaller group, and thus the design session was held 
once we had a sufficient number of participants , representing 
a diversity of gender identities , enrolled. The co- design ses-
sion was video recorded with participant consent. Using the Mixing Ideas method  [19], participants first sketched 
wireframes individually. Afterward, they paired up to share 
their sketches and ideas and develop a joint design together. 
Finally, each pair worked together, shared their designs, and 
creat ed a final prototype. The goal of this co -design session 
was to a) create wireframes of an online sexual health re-
source for gender -diverse  youth and b) understand design ra-
tionale for each component of their resources. Appendix B presents wireframes from our co -design session.  
Data Analysis  
We conducted a thematic analysis [7] of transcribed video 
data from the focus groups and co -design session, the text 
and design data pulled from the Discord groups, and the wireframes created in the co -design session. To build on fo-
cus group results during  the ARC, we accelerated focus 
group analysis by using a modified transcription process. 
Two members of the research team noted key themes from each 5-minute  increment in the group videos. They tran-
scribed quotes around key discussion points (such as the 
summary of a discussion around preferred format for a spe-cific content area) on a templated note -taking document and 
discussed when disagreements occurred. An initial codebook of themes was created a priori based on the key g oals of the 
study. Three  authors reviewed and coded the focus group 
transcripts and ARC postings for key themes, iterating on codes and resolving disagreements via discussion.  We devel-
oped codes generally around format, content, and design 
preferences.  Finally, two investigators re- read all notes, code 
summaries, and primary data sources and re -summarized 
main themes in memo form. We compared all memos gener-ated to iterate upon emergent themes.  
The research team confirmed themes and analysis of their 
data w ith the participants throughout the study, once during 
the ARC portion and again during the co -design session. At 
those points, the research team generated and presented in-
terim summaries of participant ideas and requirements and 
asked participants for feedback and clarifications. This al-
lowed us to ensure that we were not misinterpreting data and helped ground our analysis.  
Ethical Considerations  
The research team prioritized creating a gender -affirming, 
safe environment. Study staff used youth’s chosen na mes (as 
opposed to legal names) and their pronouns. Focus groups were conducted in a private room where many participantsattended support groups  for gender -diverse youth. Due to the 
vulnerable nature of this population, we created protocols in 
the event that a youth expressed emotional distress or 
thoughts of harm to self or others. For full protocol for dis-closure of self- harm, please see Appendix C. The research 
team moderated ARC discussion threads and encouraged the 
youth to create anonymous usernames that protected their 
privacy. At least one member of the research team monitored 
online discussions daily for concerns of safety or emotional 
distress, though no such posts occurred. To protect privacy, 
the research team pulled data from each Discord group , 
anonymized content, then deleted each server at the conclu-sion of the study. Finally, all sessions and protocols were ap-
proved by Seattle Children ’s Institutional Review Board.  
RESULTS 
In this section, we present themes in three main categories: 1) 
preferred format s and sources , 2) design needs of gender -di-
verse youth, and 3) other considerations  beyond sexual health.  
Preferred Format s and Sources  
Preferred formats for receiving information varied by the type of information. For each previously identified content 
area, we tracked the relative preferences for the four format 
options given in the Four Corners exercise (see Table 1). If a 
participant finished the exercise between two or more catego-ries, they were counted as preferring both categories. If a par-
ticipant expressed that multiple formats would be acceptable 
but did not iden tify specific preferences, they were placed in 
the indeterminate/middle category. In Table 1, we note that 
although contraception and fertility were combined  when we 
presented the topics , participants tended to describe prefer-
ring written basic information  on contraception and in person 
for discussions about fertility.  Additionally, if a participant 
described multiple preferred formats for a specific content 
area, they were counted in all preferred categories (i.e. , cate-
gories are not mutually exclusive). If a participant expressed 
that multiple formats would be acceptable but did  not indi-
cate specific preferences, or did not describe a specific pref-
erence, they were placed in the indeterminate/middle category. Participants expressed that their format preferences de-
pended on the type of information they were seeking . They 
highlighted three themes of information types: 1) universal, 
fact-based sexual health content (i.e., information about STIs 
and contraception) and 2) content that requires personaliza-
tion to an individual’s specific gender  and/or  medical transi-
tion, and 3) relational topics (e.g., consent, disclosure of gen-der). Additionally, the source of information is also an im-
portant consideration  regardless  of format . 
Fact-Based Sexual Health I nformation  
The majority of participants preferred a written format for receiving universal, fact -based information on STIs or con-
traception. Participants expressed that written formats, in-cluding print and online text,  are useful for having an initial 
base of knowledge they could refer back to at any time. Some participants also said written information allowed for dis-
crete access to information, which was helpful to avoid social 
anxiety. One participant from Focus Group 2 expressed: “I 
think written information is really good [...] because it elim-
inates a lot of the shame because it’s hard to get up and find 
someone and be like, hey, can I just talk to you about a sex 
question? And it’s also something you have access to if it’s 
online, at all times. It’s really useful.”  Further, no consistent 
preference was expressed for paper versus online written in-formation or vice versa.  
Some participants expressed the value of receiving infor-mation via an in -person interaction, part icularly with medical 
providers. In Focus Group 1, one perceived benefit of having 
an in-person discussion with providers that emerged was the 
idea that STI testing or contraception could be immediately 
integrated into the visit if desired by the participa nt. Other 
participants expressed that having in- person conversations 
could be de -stigmatizing. Another youth said they would 
prefer the online Q&A format for STI and contraception in-
formation because it  would  allow them to gather multiple 
perspectives and build an online social community.  
Some participants expressed reservations about in -person or 
Q&A formats. Reasons given included social anxiety, a lack 
of anonymity, and potential for stigmatizing responses if a 
 Written 
Material  Q&A In-Person  Video  Indeterminate/ 
Middle  
Sexually Transmitted Infections  11 5 5 0 2 
Contraception and Fertility 6 3 8 4 4 
Sex and Desire  5 1 11 3 5 
Puberty and Dysphoria  1 5 8 4 5 
Consent, Disclosure, and Other Relationship Topics  3 6 9 6 2 
Table 1. Final Format Preferences Based on the Four Corners Exerciseprovider or facilitator responded in a non -affirming way. An 
additional conce rn related to Q&A format was that, without 
moderation by experts, answers could potentially be posted 
by sources that did not have accurate information or were 
speaking only from anecdotal experience. 
Finally, after a discussion about the relative merits o f each of 
these formats, participants in both focus groups reached a 
consensus that a combination of formats might increase ac-
cessibility for youth. Specifically, youth most often sug-
gested a combination of written with in -person or Q&A , as 
this would faci litate r eading  the information beforehand 
and/or referring  back to it easily afterwards. A participant 
from Focus Group 1 stated, “birth control is such a specific 
thing that eventually you will need to talk to your doctor, but 
written [information] is a g ood place to start.”  Adding to 
this, a participant during Focus Group 2 expressed: “if I had 
a conversation in person…and they give a whole bunch of 
different information and I remember very little or none of it. 
But if I had it written down then it is lik e, this is the 
thing…does that make sense?”  Another participant from Fo-
cus Group 2 explained their split decision and placement dur-ing the Four Corners Exercise: “I’m mostly standing down 
the center because…I know a lot of people who only tend to retain me mory through writing and people who retain 
through experience.”  
Sexual Health Topics Requiring Personalized I nformation  
Participant  preferences changed when it came to sexual 
health topics that called for information to be more personal-
ized to each individual’s experience  or transition . For these 
content areas, youth in this study preferred in- person, Q&A, 
and, to a lesser extent, video formats over written infor-
mation. Some participants again recommended offering the 
information in multiple  or integrated formats to accommo-
date those with different learning styles,  social anxiety , or 
those who were not yet ready to come out.  
When discussing specific  STI treatment s or contraception 
options, many participants preferred in-person or interactive 
discussions, as they felt that this method afforded them the ability to receive information tailored to their specific needs, 
gender, medications/treatments, and/or behaviors in which they were engaging. Some preferred to get infor mation in -per-
son specifically from a gender- affirming provider or via an in-
teractive Q&A format moderated by an expert because it would allow them to pose personalized questions that could not be included in a written article or fact sheet. As a partici-
pant wrote  during the ARC , “I think everyone can see the ben-
efit of having this information literally coming out of a certi-
fied person's mouth. Specifically, someone who may or may be 
a doctor/nurse but who is trained in medicine when it comes 
to preconception along with birth control and menstruation.”  
Similarly, when learning about the effects of gender -affirm-
ing treatments on fertility, sex, desire, and dysphoria, partic-ipants emphasized in -person or Q&A formats for personaliz-
ing information to a person’s s pecific needs, particularly 
with regard to effects of hormone therapy. As one participant from Focus Group 2 stated, “everyone’s puberty is different 
and everybody’s transition is different so that’s why Q&A 
can be helpful.”  Similarly, a nother participant from Focus 
Group 1 said, “when you start hormones, you’re kind of go-
ing through that 2nd puberty…there’s a lot of stuff online, 
generally puberty is different from person to person and it 
can’t really be generalized…it’s not something everyone can 
feel the  same about, especially with dysphoria .”  
Relationship -Oriented Topics  
When approaching relational topics such as navigating con-sent with a partner, setting and maintaining boundaries with 
partners, and deciding when and how to disclose transgender 
and/or gender -diverse status to a prospective partner, partic-
ipants expressed a desire for formats that provided youth with scripting for how to handle fluid situations, allowing 
them to observe body language, facial expressions, tone of 
voice, and specific langu age. Thus, participants primarily 
preferred both in -person and video formats for these topics. 
A participant from Focus Group 1 weighed the pros and cons 
of in- person versus videos: “Doing stuff in person always 
prevents misunderstandings, which I’ve had m y fair share of, 
and it’s definitely a lot easier to get your point across. But 
also videos are really good for learning how to go about 
bringing up the topic, whether you are asking someone about their identity or coming out about your own identity.”  An-
other participant from Focus Group 1 debated the same ques-
tion: “With videos when you see someone talking about their 
own experiences you can see more how they feel… you can relate more and it also emphasizes the importance when they 
talk about stuff that th ey’ve experienced.”  
Preferences for Information Sources 
In considering the source of fact -based information, partici-
pants almost universally stated that they preferred that con-tent be developed by a medical provider with experience in 
gender affirming care . One youth from the second ARC 
group wrote about the limitations of Q&A or the lived expe-rience: “For the most part, I am all in support of the ‘made 
by trans people, for trans people’ idea. But I think some of this information would also be helpful if it  came directly, not 
only from a trans person, but perhaps a therapist or a doctor 
who have worked with trans people and their experiences.”  
Similar to general, fact- based information, participants 
tended to prefer to receive personalized information from a medical provider with expertise in gender care and 
knowledge of their specific treatments and desired treatment outcomes. One participant from Focus Group 1 elaborated: 
“having in -person a doctor saying ‘this is completely nor-
mal,’ things like that becaus e some people don’t know how 
to relieve all of their sexual tension because as a trans per-
son it’s kind of hard to do that when you don’t have all the 
resources to learn about how to do that.”  Video or writtenmaterials were seen as beneficial by a minorit y of partici-
pants for tailored information. One participant from Focus 
Group 2 described receiving detailed written information at 
a conference for gender diverse people and said that   that 
“written material helped me understand that there are ways 
I can fix how I’m feeling, and there are ways that I can feel 
better about, and I’ve been pretty happy since then.”  How-
ever, it was also described by some as impersonal and poten-
tially harmful to those who may be undergoing transitions or 
journeys that do not fit  what static materials might describe.  
For relational topics, there was an emphasis by youth on the 
lived experienc e: participants expressed a desire for content 
to be created by transgender and/or gender- diverse people. 
As a participant from the first ARC  group noted, “I think it 
might be good to show (in addition to the info regarding sex, 
std, puberty, etc.) LGBTQ+ video creators. Many who do 
content that I’ve watched go into some part of their stories on the info mentioned.” 
In design practice, particip ants discussed how clarity  of an  
information ’s source is important, and they shared that they 
view citations, author profiles, date published, and links to 
external resources to establish credibility. While reviewing 
an existing resource, one participant in the co -design session 
appreciated the sources: “the citations support their reliabil-
ity and accuracy.”  Another participant from Focus Group 2 
conveyed that “when you don’t get information from a really 
trustworthy source it can be really easy to believe something for many years that turns out to be absolute ly not true…false 
information…a lot, a lot of misinformation.”  
Design Needs of Gender Diverse Youth  
Discreet and Non- Triggering  
While many of the youth recognized the value in having a trans -specific information resource, they also emphasized 
the importanc e that it be discreet over concerns that it might 
out someone if accessed publicly. Many focused on the logo and landing pages in particular. For instance, a participant from the co -design session suggested a more generic logo ra-
ther than one displaying a logo or symbol associated with the 
transgender community. Another co- design participant sug-
gested a logo that could be recognizable within the commu-
nity, but not obvious to others. They pointed out that the use 
of male/female symbols and colors from the tr ans flag 
(white, pink, and blue) could immediately out a person. The co-design participants agreed that whatever color the trans -
friendly resource used,  that it should not immediately be ob-
vious that it is meant for trans users yet is easily identifiable by community members.  
Many participants advocated for the use of visuals for an online sex education resource but warned that some content might be triggering to some users. Participants discussed the 
importance of presenting non -triggering information and vis-uals as a part of an online sex education resource. Some par-ticipants debated the use of cartoon images for things like 
anatomy, as some sex educational resources have used, ver-sus real ones. They suggested two possible features for this: 
hideability of visuals and blacklisting of topics. In the first 
Discord group, a participant wrote “on the actual website, I 
think there should be some pictures, but that are not actively 
visible to prevent discomfort ( i.e., a picture of a uterus) .” 
From the same group,  one wrote “I’d like more emphasis on 
images too, but the images should be hidden under a ‘spoiler ’ system. This is to prevent triggering.”  In our co -
design session, a participant introduced a feature where vis-
ual content would be hidden by default, obscur ing potentially 
triggering visual content where the person could click to 
show or hide content. 
Participants came to a general consensus around the ability 
to blacklist or mute tags (i.e. , controlling what content they 
see). In the co -design session, one participant designed the 
blacklisting feature, pointing out that articles and resources on the site should have tags that described the larger topics covered, which would make it easier to find relevant infor-
mation and, crucially, obscure anything that migh t be trig-
gering to a person. A participant from the second Discord 
group wrote “[I]'d really like that idea to feature blacklisted 
informational tags as well, assuming there's an account reg-istration alongside this feature to also save worthwhile arti-cles. basically, to hit all bases in removing and avoiding cer-
tain topics as much as it helps search and gather infor-
mation.” Some participants also asked for an additional fea-
ture that involved personalizing the resource through quiz-
zes. The co -design session participants voiced a need for a 
“triggers quiz & types of info interested in to tailor results” 
or a “short quiz or bio to filter out triggering information .” 
The Importance of Incorporating Lived Experience  
Participants emphasized the importance of both incorporat-
ing lived experience perspectives that represented different 
viewpoints, and of making it prominent on the website that 
content was at least partially written by gender -diverse  per-
sons. For instance, one participant from the first Discord group s aid, “I think it's really important to have multiple ex-
periences shared by non -binary people, especially of all 
ages. I feel like society has been telling non -binary people 
that their identities are just phases, so they don't really have 
an idea of what th ey will look like when they're older. It's a 
wise idea to have an older non -binary person who can say, 
‘Hey, I did it. And I'm still non -binary.’” From the same ses-
sion, another mentioned that people  who might engage in  
hormone therapy  might start it  at different times, thus making 
second puberty difficult to generalize. Additionally, a partic-
ipant from the second Discord group talked about how “it’s 
useful to have resources sorted by if they are more aimed at 
transfem people vs transmasc people, because it  can help 
with people who don’t know what terms mean .”Building Credibility through Security  and Relevance  
Many youths wished for a sex education resource to be pro-
fessional, which carried a range of definitions. For some, a 
professional site meant that it was credible and certain infor-
mation was linked to trustworthy sources (e.g. , medical jour-
nals). Participants from Focus Group 1 also expressed the 
difficulty of assessing whether information they came across 
online was credible or not. Some partic ipants referenced sites 
created by TERFs (Trans Exclusionary Radical Feminists) that initially come across as well -intentioned but, after closer 
review, actually spread misinformation and harmfully en-
couraged dysphoria.  
Data privacy and security was another significant theme that 
participants brought up in considering an online sex educa-
tion resource. As one participant from the second Discord group wrote, “[l]egally, confidentiality should be the top-
most priority for a s ensitive topic such as sexual health.”  
Some thought it was important for such a resource to be transparent about who is publishing the resource, whether 
cookies are being used, and how data are tracked (or not 
tracked). Many participants strongly suggested  that their 
ideal resource would not track their data.  
Relatedly, there were discussions around how to integrate a 
safe and secure, yet optional, log -in system. As some co -de-
sign participants discussed, logins could  allow  for personal-
ized trigger warnings, as mentioned in the non- triggering 
section, and for saving articles to reference later. However, others pointed out that accessing information while using an account also could mean that their data might be tracked. 
Youth  also noted that accounts and logins  could be anonymous 
(usernames or auto -generated, such as a number and a color) 
and that people should not be forced to use their real names.  
To improve  relevance, participants highlighted the need for 
orientation towards local resources, and this theme was par-ticularly salient when participants during the ARC were 
asked to review existing resources. From the second Discord 
group, one youth pointed out “I'd also like to be able to spec-
ify search by network (like if I want to stay within the Seattle 
Children’s  Clinic as much as possible, I can contain my 
search results to there first) or within a zip code or city limit.”  Another from the same server wrote , “I think having 
a mobile app serving as a link between youth and provider is 
an innovative and reliable technique. with more and more 
gender -diverse youth scouring the internet for answers safe 
places, where else would be a better resource than the one 
sitting in your pocket? it feels like a google maps for the 
transgender community, and that's really comforting.”  In the 
co-design session, participants highlighted the inclusion of 
“location -based info” and even drew out a map that would 
display local medi cal teams, doctors, and other resources.  
A few participants made it clear that having poorly updated information about local resources would be worse than hav-
ing no local resources section. For example, They2ze, a youth- designed app with a database of heal th and life re-
sources vetted by the trans community, drew criticism for not 
being updated, as one participant wrote “they2ze has so 
much potential, it is unbearably disappointing that the last 
time it was updated was two years ago.”  
Other Considerations  Beyond Sexual Health  
Although activities focused on sexual health, participants consistently brought up several related themes. First, they 
talked about other aspects pertaining to their health,  such as 
their hormone levels, side effects, expected pace of ph ysical 
changes, interactions with birth control and other medica-
tions, and mental health resources. For instance, a participant 
from the first Discord group wrote, “ I feel a scientific and 
medical help section would be great and help people under-
stand the health side of being trans.”  
Several participants also described non -sexual/reproductive 
health situations in which they had to deal with coming out and/or answering questions about their gender. A participant 
from Focus Group 1 expressed: “I go to the same school I’ve 
gone to my entire life, so for the most part I don’t have to 
deal with [coming out]. But also,  when I get out and I’m 
‘stealth’ I feel like I’m alive for the first time, but then I don’t want to tell anyone anything so I’m terrified. I’m livi ng but I 
am terrified.”  Additionally, participants emphasized that 
basic information, such as etiquette for how to treat a trans 
person with respect, needed to be taught to everyone regard-
less of gender identity to reduce stigma and dysphoria.  
Our design s essions also surfaced aspects of designing for 
better sexual health distinct from technological solutions. Particularly, the participants called for a redesign of sexual 
health curriculum to include gender -diverse  topics. When 
discussing their own experiences with sex education in for-
mal, American educational settings, participants revealed several failings. For instance, curriculum might treat sexual 
health as a taboo subject by either excluding the topic alto-
gether or shallowly covering it. As one Focus G roup 2 par-
ticipant expressed: “My school has history of treating gender 
in sex education like poison oak, you will touch it and then 
never touch it again .” A youth from Focus Group 1 called 
out that “schools have created ignorance around trans peo-
ple by no t talking about their issues; there should be educa-
tion for everyone on trans issues and trans etiquette .” Ne-
glecting these topics can have adverse developmental effects . 
One participant from Focus Group 1 shared that they transi-
tioned later than they pref erred to because information on 
their identity was not available through their sex education.  
Reflection on M ethod  
Although combining in -person methods with the ARC is 
counter- intuitive for an ARC and not possible in many cases, 
we found there were benefits to doing so. For example, after 
our second focus group concluded, many participants had con-gregated to one corner o f the room next to the table of food. 
We were pleasantly surprised to find that they were sharingtheir Discord usernames and connecting with each other 
online  without having been prompted  to do so. One exclaimed 
that they had never been in a room of other trans and gender -
diverse youth before. The Discord server consisting of partic-
ipants from the second focus group  had many interactions. 
Participants built on each other’s ideas and ha d debates , ap-
pearing to have established trust and rapport  perhaps in part 
due to the connections they made  from meeting in -person . 
However, we did not conduct a network analysis,  nor did we 
interview participants to reflect on our methods, so we cannot make definitive claims about the effect of this combination.  
The Four Corn ers Exercise that we introduced is just a slight 
modification to Walsh et al.’s  line judging technique [43], but 
adding an additional dimension for participants to choose from led to added  insight into the nuances of their preferences. Hav-
ing an expanded range of options allowed the research team 
to identify the situational nature of the questions we were 
posing,  as outlined in our findings. Additionally, the process 
of having each youth share their rationale for their placement, 
then watching others move based on this reasoning and in turn 
express why they moved, generated valuable feedback.  
DISCUSSION  
Our results inform design choices about the formats and sources for sex education resource s for gender -diverse youth 
(RQ1 ), as well as the  role of design and technology in the 
creation of those resources (RQ2). While our research fo-
cused on design, the results also point to policy implications of equal importance to those for design, and we discuss those 
as well. Finally, our results  inform future research, particu-
larly participatory research addressing difficult -to-discuss 
topics like sexual health (RQ3).   
Implications for Design  of Sex education Resources for 
Gender -Diverse Youth 
Designers of a sex education resource for trans and gender  
diverse youth should consider 1) which formats and sources 
to present information and 2) two themes  that cut across the 
design needs described above , considering safety and the 
range of gender -diverse experiences . 
The participants of our study preferred c ertain formats based 
on the nature of a specific sexual health topic. They favored 
written content or reference materials from a credible source 
for fact- based information and interactive and/or multimedia 
approaches for more relational content. Thus, a hy brid of in -
person and online content may be the best strategy for de-
signing resources to serve gender -diverse  youth as they nav-
igate a multiplicity of experiences. Additionally, bringing to-
gether interactive, online Q&A with either a gender special-
ist prov ider or person with lived experience with written and 
video resources might allow for broader reach to more dis-
enfranchised youth. This would help reach those who would not normally have access to in -person sex education re-
sources due to a lack of parent al support, logistical  or geo-
graphic limitations, or access to gender- specific care [17]. Finally, sexual health information is intimately linked with 
other aspects of the gender -diverse experience, thus effective 
sex education resource s will likely include content address-
ing other aspects of trans health, such as transition, hor-
mones, or pubertal blockers. This may also increase the ap-
peal of the resource  to gender -diverse  individuals, as well as 
make it less stigmatizing or embarrassing to access content.  
Our results sugges t that technology can play an important 
role in the sex education of gender -diverse  youth, including 
both physical and social development. An online resource 
has the potential to provide important information that may 
help individuals form their identities  faster or seek help when 
necessary. However, designers of such an online tool should 
consider two design implications salient across the design 
needs raised in our findings : designing for safety and design-
ing for inclusion.  
Considering safety should invol ve protecting youths from 
emotional distress by avoiding triggering dysphoria and from 
others who might try to harm them by not outing users to the public and securing their data. Youth in this study created 
ways to account for each such as blacklisting an d toggling 
hideability features, employing discreet design, and non -
mandatory login capabilities. The option to have privacy and anonymity and the ability to block out dysphoria -producing 
content is paramount for this group; if resources are not de-signed w ith care , they could inadvertently contribut e to dys-
phoria or stigma for this population.  More recently, research-
ers have emphasized safety for online gender -diverse users 
as a design priority [20]. Scheuerman et al . called for tech-
nology designers to attend to subtle forms of violence perpe-trated online in addition to prominent ones  [36]. In addition 
to Scheu erman et al .’s “insider harm” [36], or harm from 
within an individual’s social networks, designers should also consider harms that are experienced internally such as dys-
phoria, triggering content, or social comparison. In regard to  
data privacy, some have offered solutions such as allowed internet users under 18 to opt -in to data tracking and stronger 
mechanisms to erase youth’s pers onal information [40]. In 
our extension of these ideas, we also draw from Pinter et al.’s 
call for giving youth more agency in their data privacy and 
security. We recommend that technology designers consider 
this by being transparent about their privacy policies and let-
ting youth choose what happens with their dat a. 
Designers should also account for the range in developmen-
tal and social experiences of gender -diverse  youth. Design-
ing for inclusion requires designers to recognize that even 
within the category of gender -diverse  youth, individuals en-
counter very different experiences on very different time-lines. For instance, two youths of the same age may respond 
to hormone therapy differently or may take different doses or combinations of medications. Accounting for such variety 
is not an easy task, but it is importan t not to frame any one 
experience as a norm to avoid unnecessary and potentiallyharmful comparisons. Additionally, designers should con-
sider that potential users may also have a spectrum of access 
to resources. An online tool can help extend access to car e, 
but it is crucial that such a resource does not solely center the 
urban experience [23]. Finally, if technology designers pro-
vide local resources for their users, it is crucial to regularly 
update such a database so that it is relevant and usable. As 
participants’ reactions to they2ze demonstrate, it may be bet-ter to have no resource than an outdated one.  
Implications for Policy  
IDC researchers are faced with the difficult challenge of bringing youth online while also protecting them from po-
tential danger. As such, IDC research needs to continue to 
expand its understanding o f how we can shape future policy. 
Examining how policy and design are entangled is especially important in the context of this study, because online re-
sources will have limited utility if current education policies 
prevent them from reaching the youths who need their con-
tent most. Therefore, technology designers cannot take on this 
problem space alone; they must advocate for policy that guar-antees access to education content and resources for all youth.  
Youths in this study highlighted structural changes th at tech-
nology design cannot accomplish on its own. In conceptual-izing an ideal sex education resource, many brainstormed so-lutions beyond artifact design and emphasized that education 
cannot ignore the experiences of gender -diverse youth. Sev-
eral in this study asked for inclusion of content about gender -
diversity in sex education curricula for all youth  as well as a 
way to address discrimination and ignorance. Policymakers should consider how to incorporate content that covers gen-
der-diverse experiences (i. e., definitions, basic etiquette for 
addressing a person who identifies as transgender, non -bi-
nary, or elsewhere on the gender diversity spectrum) into 
curriculum. Curricula should also take advantage of multiple modes of conveying certain kinds of informa tion. In addition 
to school policy, we highlight participants’ concerns over 
data privacy to push policymakers to modernize their con-
ceptions of data (e.g., personal health data from wearables) and how to more effectively protect them. Finally, we chal-
lenge social media platforms to reconsider what counts as 
“adult” content when choosing what to ban. Algorithms need 
to be refined so that they do not alienate gender -diverse users 
and the educational experience that their platforms can pro-
vide. Likewise, scho ols may need to consider whether con-
tent filters in place on school computers may inadvertently 
exclude youths from accessing necessary health content.  
Implications for Research  
Being able to collaborate with gender -diverse youths on a re-
source for gender -diverse youths was a valuable and reward-
ing opportunity, and so we reflect on the benefits and limita-tions of our methods and possible future directions. Partici-patory design proved effective for engaging with this group. As previous scholars have detailed, participatory design can 
help youth analyze and enact their identities through design  [10] and surface and address systemic change [6]. Booker 
and Goldman additionally note that participatory design re-search is strengthened in the ways it allows for open dialogue and challenges traditional researcher/participant roles and who counts as learners versus who counts as an authority  [6]. 
Our approach in this study embraced these principles as we made clear that the learning process and space was one that was co -created by researchers and participants alike. Doing 
so allowed for honest dialogues about traditionally difficult -
to-discuss topics like sex education, sexual health, and their 
respective lived experiences. Previous research to under-stand how youth cope with and talk about other di fficult and 
sometimes vulnerable experiences has yielded similar re-sults. For example, Hong et al. also explored the need for an outlet to discuss a sensitive topic like managing a complex 
chronic illness as an adolescent  [24], and we extend their 
findings by providing additional methods.  
This study identifies individual support through the use of an online resource, and so future work might consider examin-
ing how to integrate social support into sex education. Addi-
tionally, other work might consider how to provide sex edu-
cation through multiple channels, rather than through a sin-
gular, gender -diverse -specific resource. Next, t his study is 
rooted in Western, hegemonic views of what it means to be 
transgender and/or gender -diverse, and we note that our find-
ings merely represent a part of the trans experience. The par-ticipants of our study tended to consist of youth located close to urban areas w ith access to gender -affirming care  or sup-
port, making our results diffi cult to transfer to all gender di-
verse youth.  Finally, the size of our samples in each part of 
the study and the age range of participants might have con-cealed more specific needs than those surfaced in this study . 
CONCLUSION  
Trans and gender diverse youths deserve access to thorough 
and affirming sex education. Given the absence of sex edu-
cation that encompasses the gender -diverse  experience, the 
online world has great potential in providing support to many 
gender -diverse  youth. We imagine our results inspir ing the 
creation of  an ecosystem of integrated resources, with coher-
ent links among them, that are designed for privacy, safety, and inclusion . Designing such resources will not be enough, 
however, so we also discuss policy needs  to promote access 
to those  resources and gender -inclusive sex education . We 
also hope that researchers working  with marginalized youth 
or studying  difficult topics can benefit from our description 
of the Four Corners Exercise and our successes combining 
in-person focus groups  with an ARC study.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
We are grateful to the participants  in our study  for their will-
ingness to share their experiences. We thank anonymous re-
viewers  and community partners for their valuable input  and 
support. This study was funded by  the Department of Human 
Centered Design & Engineering and the  Center for Diversity 
and Health Equity at Seattle Children’s Hospital #24090057.APPENDICES  
All supplementary materials for this study are available at 
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3755883 . 
SELECTION AND PARTICIPATION OF CHILDREN  
The research team recruited through two channels: 1) com-munity -based organizations that support gender -diverse 
youth and their families and 2) patients from Seattle Chil-
dren’s Gender  Clinic. Study staff  conducted a consent con-
ference with each youth individually by phone, emphasizing the voluntary nature of the study and disclosing the most sen-
sitive topics. All youth w ere given the assent/consent form. 
Because it is common for trans youth to be estranged from 
their legal guardians and/or seeking parental permission 
could potentially endanger them, we obtained a waiver of pa-
rental permission from Seattle Children’s IRB f or all partic-
ipants. Youth were compensated for each activity they elected to participate in ($30/focus group, $10/week for 3 
weeks of ARC, $30 for co -design group).  
REFERENCES  
[1] Ahrens, K.R., Spencer, R., Bon nar, M., Coatney, A. 
and Hall, T. 2016. Qualitative evaluation of historical and relational factors influencing pregnancy and 
sexually transmitted infection risks in foster youth. Children and Youth Services Review . (2016). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ch ildyouth.2015.12.027.  
[2] Alabama lawmaker aims to keep transgender athletes off school teams: 2020. https://www.al.com/news/2020/01/alabama -
lawmaker- aims-to-keep- transgender -athletes -off-
school- teams.html . 
[3] Ashktorab, Z. and Vitak, J. 2016. Designing 
cyberbullying mitigation and prevention solutions 
through participatory design with teenagers. 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
- Proceedings  (2016).  
[4] Bhattacharya, A., Liang, C., Zeng, E.Y., Shukla, K., 
Wong, M.E.R., Munson, S.A. and Kie ntz, J.A. 2019. 
Engaging teenagers in asynchronous online groups to design for stress management. Proceedings of the 
18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children, IDC 2019  (2019).  
[5] Bleakley, A., Hennessy, M. and Fishbein, M. 2006 . 
Public opinion on sex education in US schools. 
Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine . 
(2006). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1001/archpedi.160.11.1151.  
[6] Booker, A. and Goldman, S. 2016. Participatory 
Design Research as a Practice for Systemic Repair: 
Doing Hand- in-Hand Math Research with Families. 
Cognition and Instruction . (2016). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/07370008.2016.1179535.  
[7] Braun, V. and Clarke , V. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in 
Psychology . (2006). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa.  
[8] Brener ND, Demissie Z, McManus T, Shanklin SL, Queen B, K.L. 2017. School Health Profiles 2016: 
Characteristics  of Health Programs Among 
Secondary Schools . 
[9] Brennan, J., Kuhns, L.M., Johnson, A.K., Belzer, M., Wilson, E.C. and Garofalo, R. 2012. Syndemic theory 
and HIV -related risk among young transgender 
women: The role of multiple, co -occurring health 
problems  and social marginalization. American 
Journal of Public Health . 
[10] Coenraad, M., Palmer, J., Franklin, D. and Weintrop, 
D. 2019. Enacting identities: Participatory design as a 
context for youth to reflect, project, and apply their 
emerging identities. Proceedings of the 18th ACM 
International Conference on Interaction Design and Children, IDC 2019  (2019).  
[11] Elia, J.P. and Eliason, M.J. 2010. Dangerous omissions: Abstinence- only- until-marriage school -
based sexuality education and the betrayal of lgbtq 
youth. American Journal of Sexuality Education . 
(2010). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/15546121003748848.  
[12] Etikan, I., Musa, S.A. and Alkassim, R.S. 2016. Comparison of Convenience Sampling. American 
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Statistics . (2016). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.11648/j.ajtas.20160501.11.  
[13] Faulkner, S.L. and Lannutti, P.J. 2016. Representations of lesbian and bisexual women’s 
sexual and relational health in online video and text -
based sources. Computers in Human Behavior . 
(2016). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.06.039.  
[14] Fisher, K. E., Bishop, A.P., Magassa, L. and Fawcett, 
P. 2014. Action! Co -designing interactive technology 
with immigrant teens. ACM International Conference 
Proceeding Series  (2014).  
[15] Fisher, K.E., Yefimova, K. and Yafi, E. 2016. 
“Future’s butterflies:” Co -designing ICT wayfaring 
technology with refugee Syrian youth. Proceedings of 
IDC 2016 - The 15th International Conference on 
Interaction Design and Children  (2016).  
[16] Fox, J. and Ralston, R. 2016. Queer identity online: 
Informal learning and teaching experie nces of 
LGBTQ individuals on social media. Computers in 
Human  Behavior . (2016). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.06.009.  
[17] Gridley, S.J., Crouch, J.M., Evans, Y., Eng, W., 
Antoon, E., Lyapustina, M., Schimmel -Bristow, A., 
Woodward, J., Dundon, K.,  Schaff, R.N., McCarty,C., Ahrens, K. and Breland, D.J. 2016. Youth and 
Caregiver Perspectives on Barriers to Gender -
Affirming Health Care for Transgender Youth. Journal of Adolescent Health . (2016). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2016.03.017.  
[18] Griner, S.B., Vamos, C.A., Thompson, E.L., Logan, R., Vázquez -Otero, C. and Daley, E.M. 2017. The 
Intersection of Gender Identity and Violence: Victimization Experienced by Transgender College 
Students. Journal of Interpersonal Violence . 
[19] Guha, M.L ., Druin, A., Chipman, G., Fails, J.A., 
Simms, S. and Farber, A. 2004. Mixing ideas: A new technique for working with young children as design 
partners. Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on 
Interaction Design and Children: Building a 
Community, IDC 2004  (2004).  
[20] Haimson, Oliver L.; Gorrell, Dykee; Starks, Denny 
L.; Weinger, Z. Designing Trans Technology: 
Defining Challenges and Envisioning Community -
Centered Solutions. ACM CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems . 
[21] Haimson, O.L., Dame -Griff, A., Capello, E. and 
Richter, Z. 2019. Tumblr was a trans technology: the 
meaning, importance, history, and future of trans 
technologies. Feminist Media Studies . (2019). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/14680777.2019.1678505.  
[22] Haley, S.G., Tordoff, D.M ., Kantor, A.Z., Crouch, 
J.M. and Ahrens, K.R. 2019. Sex Education for 
Transgender and Non -Binary Youth: Previous 
Experiences and Recommended Content. Journal of 
Sexual Medicine . (2019). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsxm.2019.08.009.  
[23] Hardy, J. and Va rgas, S. 2019. Participatory design 
and the future of rural LGBTQ communities. DIS 
2019 Companion - Companion Publication of the 
2019 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference  
(2019).  
[24] Hong, M.K., Wilcox, L., Machado, D., Olson, T.A. 
and Simoneaux, S.F. 2016. Care partnerships: Toward 
technology to support teens’ participation in their 
health care. Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems - Proceedings  (2016).  
[25] Jackson, S.J., Gillespie, T. and Payette, S. 2014. The 
policy knot: Re -integra ting policy, practice and design 
in CSCW studies of social computing. Proceedings of 
the ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work, CSCW (2014).  
[26] MacLeod, H., Jelen, B., Prabhakar, A., Oehlberg, L., Siek, K. and Connelly, K. 2016. Asynchron ous 
Remote Communities (ARC) for researching distributed populations. PervasiveHealth: Pervasive 
Computing Technologies for Healthcare  (2016).  [27] Maestre, J.F., MacLeod, H., Connelly, C.L., Dunbar, J.C., Beck, J., Siek, K.A. and Shih, P.C. 2018. 
Defining through expansion: Conducting 
asynchronous remote communities (ARC) Research with stigmatized groups. Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Syst ems - Proceedings  (2018).  
[28] Marcu, G., Dowshen, N., Saha, S., Sarreal, R.R. and Andalibi, N. 2016. TreatYoSelf: Empathy -driven 
behavioral intervention for marginalized youth living 
with HIV. PervasiveHealth: Pervasive Computing 
Technologies for Healthca re (2016).  
[29] Metatla, O. and Cullen, C. 2018. “Bursting the assistance bubble”: Designing inclusive technology 
with children with mixed visual abilities. Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - 
Proceedings  (2018).  
[30] Mitchell, K.J., Ybarra,  M.L., Korchmaros, J.D. and 
Kosciw, J.G. 2014. Accessing sexual health 
information online: Use, motivations and 
consequences for youth with different sexual orientations. Health Education Research . (2014). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1093/her/cyt071.  
[31] Olson -Kennedy, J., Cohen -Kettenis, P. T., Kreukels, 
B. P., Meyer -Bahlburg, H. F., Garofalo, R., Meyer, 
W., & Rosenthal, S.M. 2016. Research priorities for gender nonconforming/transgender youth: gender identity development and biopsychosocial outcomes. Current opinion in endocrinology, diabetes, and 
obesity. 23, 2 (2016), 172.  
[32] Pitt, C. and Davis, K. 2017. Designing together?: Group dynamics in participatory digital badge design 
with teens. IDC 2017 - Proceedings of the 2017 ACM 
Conference on Interaction Des ign and Children  
(2017).  
[33] Poole, E.S. and Peyton, T. 2013. Interaction design 
research with adolescents: Methodological challenges and best practices. ACM International Conference 
Proceeding Series  (2013).  
[34] Reuter, T.R., Newcomb, M.E., Whitton, S.W . and 
Mustanski, B. 2017. Intimate partner violence 
victimization in LGBT young adults: Demographic 
differences and associations with health behaviors. Psychology of Violence . (2017). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1037/vio0000031.  
[35] Ryan, S., Yip, J., Stieff, M. and Druin, A. 2013. 
Cooperative inquiry as a community of practice. Computer -Supported Collaborative Learning 
Conference, CSCL  (2013).  
[36] Scheuerman, M.K., Branham, S.M. and Hamidi, F. 
2018. Safe spaces and safe places: Unpacking 
technology- mediated e xperiences of safety and harm 
with transgender people. Proceedings of the ACM onHuman -Computer Interaction . (2018). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3274424.  
[37] Schimmel -Bristow, A. and Ahrens, K.R. 2018. 
Technology use among special populations. 
Technology and Adolescent Mental Health . 
[38] Schimmel -Bristow, A., Haley, S.G., Crouch, J.M., 
Evans, Y.N., Ahrens, K.R., McCarty, C.A. and Inwards -Breland, D.J. 2018. Youth and caregiver 
experiences of gender identity transition: A qualitative study. Psychology of S exual Orientation and Gender 
Diversity . (2018). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1037/sgd0000269.  
[39] Services, U.S.D. of H. and H. 2010. Healthy People 
2020.  
[40] Smith, J. 2013. Talking Back to Facebook: The Common Sense Guide to Raising Kids in the Digital Age. Library Journal . (2013).  
[41] Stanger -Hall, K.F. and Hall, D.W. 2011. Abstinence -
only education and teen pregnancy rates: Why we need comprehensive sex edu cation in the U.S. PLoS 
ONE . (2011). 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0024658.  
[42] Vacca, R. 2019. Brokering data: Co -designing 
technology with latina teens to support communication with parents: Leveraging cultural practices of Latinx youth throu gh co- design. 
Proceedings of the 18th ACM International 
Conference on Interaction Design and Children, IDC 
2019 (2019).  
[43] Walsh, G., Foss, E., Yip, J. and Druin, A. 2013. 
FACIT PD: A framework for analysis and creation of 
intergenerational techniques fo r participatory design. 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
- Proceedings  (2013).  
[44] Woodman, R.W., Sawyer, J.E. and Griffin, R.W. 
1993. Toward a Theory of Organizational Creativity. 
Academy of Management Review . (1993). 
DOI:https://doi.org/ 10.5465/amr.1993.3997517.