For  God’s  sake!  Considering  Religious  Beliefs  in  HCI  Research  :  
A  Case  of  Islamic  HCI  
Samia Ibtasam 
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington 
Seattle, WA, USA 
samiai@cs.washington.edu 
ABSTRACT  
HCI  community  believes  in  understanding  socio-cultural  norms  
and  designing  for  users’  values  - both  of  which  can  stem  from  users’  
belief  systems.  Using  stories  from  my  research  work  in  an  Islamic  
context,  I  make  a  case  for  how  religion  can  impact  HCI  research.  In  
particular,  I  discuss  a)  the  implications  of  socio-cultural  norms  and  
participants’  belief  (e.g.  hijab  or  ’veil’)  on  HCI  research  in  these  set-
tings;  b)  how  religion  forms  users’  individual  and  collective  values  
and  socio-cultural  norms  that  impact  users’  understanding,  use,  or  
perception  of  technologies;  and  c)  how  our  presumptions  about  a  
belief  system  or  our  value  tensions  can  impact  reporting  and  view-
ing  of  such  fndings.  Thus,  HCI  needs  to  look  beyond  engagement  
with  populations  to  include  the  belief  systems  to  understand  the  
interpretations,  negotiations,  and  enactments  of  these  values,  their  
implications  on  our  research,  and  their  results.  
CCS  CONCEPTS  
•  Social  and  professional  topics  →  Religious  orientation ;  Cul-
tural  characteristics ;•  Human-centered  computing  →  Field  stud-
ies.  
KEYWORDS  
Religion,  IslamicHCI,  Islam,  Muslims,  Autoethnography,  Stories  
from  the  feld,  Research  Methods  
ACM  Reference  Format:  
Samia  Ibtasam.  2021.  For  God’s  sake!  Considering  Religious  Beliefs  in  HCI  
Research  :  A  Case  of  Islamic  HCI.  In  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  
Computing  Systems  Extended  Abstracts  (CHI  ’21  Extended  Abstracts),  May  
8–13,  2021,  Yokohama,  Japan.  ACM,  New  York,  NY,  USA,  8  pages.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3450383  
1  INTRODUCTION  
Islam  is  the  second-largest  practiced  religion  in  the  world  after  
Christianity  [13].  Islam  has  gotten  increased  visibility  and  attention  
in  the  past  two  decades.  However,  most  of  this  attention  has  been  
negative  [14,  16,  20].  While  this  has  created  a  lot  of  assumptions  
about  the  belief  system,  I  argue  that  there  is  an  opportunity  in  
HCI  research  for  conversations  between  and  among  diverse  belief  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. 
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). systems  and  how  they  impact  technology  consumption  and  our  
research.  
Followers  of  Islam  are  called  Muslims.  Islam,  like  most  religions,  
represents  a  set  of  values  that  impact  the  lifestyle,  norms,  and  
practices  of  its  followers.  These  norms  not  only  impact  those  who  
prescribe  to  this  belief  system  but  also  impact  those  who  live  or  
conduct  research  in  Muslim  majority  countries.  Eforts  like  Arab-
HCI  [3]  in  CHI  2017  and  Islamic  HCI  workshop  in  CHI  2020  [15]  
have  tried  to  "bring  together  CHI  researchers  and  practitioners  who  
engage  in  studies  and  interventions  within  Muslim  majority  commu-
nities  around  the  world".  These  workshops  aimed  to  discuss  and  
understand  the  Muslim  identity,  its  cultural  diversity,  the  unique  
constraints,  and  limitations  of  Muslim  communities.  In  this  work,  I  
take  these  conversations  forward  by  giving  detailed  examples  from  
my  work  within  an  Islamic  context  to  showcase  the  various  ways  
in  which  individual  and  collective  values  impact  our  users,  their  
interactions,  our  research,  and  its  reporting.  
HCI  researchers  follow  a  rigorous  process  to  identify  and  under-
stand  their  target  population  before  designing  for  or  understanding  
any  underlying  implications.  However,  the  implications  due  to  re-
ligion  have  been  typically/traditionally  overlooked.  While  there  
is  HCI  research  concerning  religion  and  spirituality,  most  of  this  
research  is  focused  on  the  use  cases  supporting  religious  practices  
rather  than  the  underlying  everyday  religious  implications.  
In  this  paper,  using  personal  stories  from  my  work  in  an  Islamic  
country,  I  share  the  various  facets  in  which  the  socio-cultural  and  re-
ligious  norms  in  such  contexts  can  impact  the  research  assumptions,  
research  processes,  and  research  contributions  in  HCI  in  general.  
I  make  a  case  for  understanding  and  including  religious  beliefs  in  
HCI  and  share  details  of  my  experience  as  a  practicing  Muslim  
working  with  Muslim  populations.  I  share  a)  how  feldwork  can  be  
impacted  in  Muslim  majority  countries  by  socio-cultural  norms  e.g.  
due  to  gender  segregation  and  hijab;  b)  how  users’  understanding,  
consumption,  and  perception  of  technology  is  infuenced  by  their  
belief  systems;  and  fnally,  c)  how  reporting  and  reviewing  of  HCI  
work  is  impacted  by  our  own  values  and  value  tensions.  While  I  
share  this  narrative  about  my  personal  experiences,  some  of  these  
implications  might  also  be  true  for  other  populations  or  religions.  
Before  each  of  these  stories,  I  also  try  to  provide  a  brief  description  
of  some  Islamic  concepts  that  are  used  in  these  stories.  
2  BACKGROUND  
CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Before  going  into  the  details  of  these  stories,  I  share  some  details  
about  myself  in  the  form  of  a  biography  as  well  as  the  context  for  
my  research  experience  which  forms  the  basis  of  this  narrative.  © 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8095-9/21/05. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3450383CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Samia  Ibtasam 
2.1  Biography  
I  am  a  graduate  student  in  a  Computer  Science  Ph.D.  program  
in  the  US.  I  was  born  and  raised  in  a  conservative,  educated,  and  
religious  household  which  meant  that  while  religion  was  frequently  
mentioned,  taught,  or  referred  to,  everyone  did  their  own  reading,  
formed  their  own  understanding,  and  practiced  based  on  their  
own  preference.  Many  sociocultural  norms  practiced  around  me,  
in  personal,  academic,  and  professional  life,  were  from  religious  
values  such  as  the  obedience  of  elders,  segregation  of  genders  at  
public  and  private  events  including  at  educational  institutions  and  
government  services.  
I  received  all  of  my  education  and  work  experience  from  Pakistan  
which  is  an  Islamic  country  and  is  considered  culturally  conser-
vative.  This  education  also  included  completing  the  recitation  of  
the  Quran  at  the  personal  level  and  being  taught  Urdu  transla-
tions  of  the  Arabic  Quranic  verses  at  the  school  level.  This,  along  
with  educational  programs  on  television  and  written  articles  which  
talked  about  and  at  times  debated  Islamic  jurisprudence,  diferences  
in  practices  between  sects  like  Sunni  and  Shiites,  and  reading  of  
books  like  Hadith  [sayings  of  the  Prophet  (SAW)]  form  my  limited  
knowledge  about  the  religion  Islam.  
Along  with  this,  I  also  had  the  opportunity  to  visit  many  other  
countries  with  Muslim  majority  and  minority  populations.  This  
also  enabled  me  to  see  the  diversity  of  interpretation  and  imple-
mentation  of  Islamic  values  such  as  mandatory  covering  of  head  
or  required  accompanying  of  male  chaperons  for  travel,  etc  - con-
cepts  that  are  not  mandatory  in  Pakistan  and  not  practised  in  urban  
Pakistan.  This  broadened  my  perspective  on  the  diversity  of  in-
terpretations  and  practices  across  diferent  Muslim  populations  
around  the  globe.  Thus,  while  I  considered  and  still  consider  myself  
a  practicing  Muslima  because  I  practice  fve  prayers  (mandatory  
on  every  practicing  Muslim  each  day)  or  fasting  for  Ramadan  (30  
days  of  fasting  where  the  fast  goes  from  pre-dawn  meal  before  the  
fast  also  called  the  suhur,  to  the  meal  at  sunset  that  breaks  the  fast  
called  the  iftar),  I  am  considered  unrecognizable  as  a  Muslima  due  
to  the  absence  of  headscarf.  
I  will  also  share  that,  like  all  cultures,  with  the  propagation  of  
media  and  change  of  practices  around  the  world  including  the  Mid-
dle  East,  many  of  the  socio-cultural  values  and  norms  are  changing.  
While  I  share  these  stories  from  my  perspective,  I  in  no  way  claim  
to  cover  all  perspectives,  interpretations,  and  experiences  of  the  
Muslim  world.  
2.2  My  Research  
The  research  work  described  in  this  paper  is  from  Pakistan.  Pak-
istan,  ofcially  named  as  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  is  one  of  the  
two  countries  formed  in  the  world  on  the  basis  of  religion  where  
Muslims  of  the  sub-continent  wanted  to  form  a  separate  homeland.  
This  concept,  famously  known  as  the  Two  Nation  Theory  [18]  im-
plied  that  there  are  many  diferences  in  religious  customs,  traditions  
between  Hindus  and  Muslims  and  they  cannot  have  a  common  na-
tionality.  Thus,  religious  values  and  beliefs  form  a  strong  part  of  its  
socio-cultural  and  political  identity.  Pakistan  is  a  Muslim  majority  
country  with  many  of  its  political,  legal,  and  social  systems  drawing  
from  and  based  on  Islamic  values  and  principles.  Pakistan,  which  was  once  a  part  of  the  sub-continent  ruled  by  
the  British  saw  a  lot  more  integration  of  values  from  both  colonial  
and  multi-ethnic  populations  in  the  sub-continent  including  Hin-
dus,  Sikhs,  and  other  minorities.  Thus,  traveling  to  other  Muslim  
majority  countries  especially  Saudi  Arabia  made  me  realize  the  
diference  in  implications  like  most,  if  not  all  of  the  Muslim  world  
could  speak  and  understand  Arabic.  While  Muslims  in  Pakistan  are  
trained  to  read  and  understand  Quran,  Arabic  speaking  and  writing  
skill  is  not  common.  
2.3  HCI  research  
There  is  not  an  absence  of  HCI  research  concerning  religion  and  
spirituality.  However,  most  of  this  research  is  focused  on  the  under-
standing  and  building  of  use  cases  supporting  religious  practices  
rather  than  the  underlying  everyday  religious  implications.  
HCI  researchers  have  called  attention  to  the  lack  of  presence  
of  literature  on  the  adaptation  and  adoption  of  technology  for  
spiritual  practices  and  in  spiritual  environments  which  has  been  
termed  as  techno-spiritualism  [4,  5,  8].  The  challenges  resulting  in  
a  lack  of  research  by  the  HCI  community  included  lack  of  funding,  
potential  sensitivity  associated  with  the  topic,  perceptions  of  lack  
of  scientifc  rigor,  and  risks  associated  with  such  research  [5].  Since  
then  we  have  seen  research  on  understanding  the  techno-spiritual  
practices  in  everyday  life  [24],  at  American  Christian  homes  [27],  
by  American  ministers  [28],  use  of  home  automation  by  American  
Orthodox  Jewish  families  [23],  American  Muslims  [25,  26]  and  
integration  of  technology  with  existing  religious  institutions  by  
Muslims  [17].  
However,  beyond  the  religious  practices  and  research  around  the  
use  of  technology  for  religious  practices,  I  hope  to  draw  attention  to  
the  implications  of  religious  beliefs  and  values  on  HCI  research  and  
its  users.  I  also  hope  to  draw  attention  to  the  need  for  exploration  of  
the  impacts  of  religious  practices,  beliefs  and  values  on  the  usage  of  
technologies  and  how  such  values  might  enable  or  limit  various  uses  
and  use-cases.  A  consideration  of  the  beliefs  and  religious  values  
will  help  understand,  design,  and  evaluate  such  methodologies,  
works,  and  their  implications  more  accurately.  
3  RELIGION,  VALUES,  AND  HCI  
The  frst  story  that  I  share  here  is  that  of  religion’s  efect  on  the  
beliefs,  societal,  and  household  norms  and  their  resulting  impact  
on  the  use  of  technological  tools.  
Financial  well-being  and  reliable  access  to  fnancial  services  
have  been  associated  with  narrowing  income  equality,  overcom-
ing  poverty,  and  enabling  growth  [6].  With  the  steady  increase  
in  internet  availability   and  smartphone   use,  reaching  45%  of  the  
total  global  population  in  2020  as  compared  to  33.5%  in  2016  [22],  
eforts  to  promote  Digital  Financial  Services  (DFS)  for  poverty  alle-
viation  and  fnancial  inclusion  eforts  have  also  increased.  DFS  is  
fnancial  services  delivered  through  digital  channels  and  include  
internet  banking,  mobile  wallets,  and  Over-The-Counter  (OTC)  
transactions.  Pakistan  is  one  of  the  DFS  ready  countries  - countries  
with  the  required  infrastructure  for  DFS  e.g.  3G/4G  infrastructure,  
formalized  government-issued  IDs,  mobile  money  friendly  policies,  
etc.  However,  the  DFS  use  and  adoption  in  Pakistan  remain  low.For God’s sake! Considering  Religious Beliefs in HCI Research : A Case of Islamic HCI 
I  started  my  research  on  Digital  Financial  Services  (DFS)  to  ex-
plore  the  lack  of  use  of  fnancial  services  including  DFS  in  Pakistan.  
I  started  with  an  exploration  of  the  use  of  existing  smartphone-
based  mobile  wallet  services  in  Pakistan.  The  research  was  focused  
on  the  ability  of  users  to  learn  to  use  existing  mobile  wallet  services  
ofered  in  Pakistan  [10].  During  the  feldwork   with  men  and  women  
in  Pakistan,  men  and  women  not  only  had  a  diferent  understand-
ing  of  fnancial  services  but  also  had  diferent  reactions  to  mobile  
wallets.  
These  diferences  were  not  only  limited  to  the  usage  and  ease  
of  use  but  also  included  diferences  in  participants’  listing  of  po-
tential  uses  and  privacy  concerns.  Men  appreciated  the  ease  of  use  
and  were  very  easily  able  to  map  the  steps  in  the  mobile  wallet  
applications  and  its  various  use  cases  to  the  processes  that  they  
had  seen  while  transacting  in  a  corner  mobile  agent  shop  where  a  
shopkeeper  (also  known  as  mobile  money  agent)  sends  or  receives  
money  using  the  network  of  mobile  operators.  In  the  absence  of  
mobile  wallets,  men  would  go  to  mobile  agent  shops  around  the  
corner  and  hand  over  their  identifcation  documents  or  information  
to  send  or  receive  money.  With  these  wallets,  the  men  noticed  that  
the  process  would  be  easier,  and  save  them  time  and  efort.  
However,  when  I  inquired  from  women  about  the  same  transac-
tions,  women  shared  that  they  normally  waited  for  their  male  family  
members  to  return  from  work  or  outside  and  then  accompany  them  
(observation  1).  These  women  believed  that  mobile  wallets  would  
enable  them  to  transact  from  the  comfort  of  their  homes.  Similarly,  
women  wanted  secrecy  and  privacy  in  their  transactions.  They  ap-
preciated  that  with  the  help  of  mobile  wallets,  they  would  be  able  to  
transact  from  home,  or  even  while  sitting  among  family  members  
without  others  realizing  that  they  are  transacting  (observation  2).  
These  observations  made  me  think  that  gender  has  a  role  to  play  
in  fnancial  understanding  and  use  and  I  wanted  to  explore  this  
further.  
3.1  Religion,  Finances,  and  Gender  
When  I  explored  further,  I  found  out  that  men  and  women  looked  
at  and  engaged  with  fnances  and  fnancial  transactions  diferently.  
And  at  times,  to  my  surprise,  women  (both  married  and  unmar-
ried)  who  even  earned  and  had  fnancial  independence  gave  up  
their  earned  money  to  the  men  in  the  family.  This  led  me  to  start  
another  study  to  understand  the  dynamics  around  the  three  im-
portant  components  that  needed  to  be  in  place  before  a  fnancial  
transaction  could  be  made.  These  included  a)  Afordability  - the  
fnances  required  to  make  a  transaction;  b)  Authority  - the  agency  
and  authority  to  spend  or  receive  money  to  make  a  transaction;  and  
c)  Access  - which  meant  access  to  a  physical  bank  or  corner  shop  or  
a  digital  device  like  a  mobile  phone  to  make  the  transaction.  All  of  
these  combined  would  enable  anyone  to  be  able  to  make  fnancial  
transactions.  
In  the  qualitative  interviews  with  men  and  women,  I  learned  that  
men  and  women  look  at  fnancial  transactions  diferently  and  there  
were  established  norms  throughout  the  society  which  permeated  
through  generations.  When  it  came  to  bigger  fnances  like  property,  
cars,  and  electronics,  men  were  considered  as  the  decision-makers.  
However,  when  it  came  to  smaller  fnancial  decisions  which  in-
cluded  day-to-day  grocery,  child  care  women  would  make  these  CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
transactions.  The  amount  of  the  transaction  decided  the  gender  of  
the  person  who  dealt  with  it.  
When  I  explored  further,  I  found  out  that  it  is  because  men  
are  considered  as  the  Head  of  the  Household.  Women,  and  men,  
believed  that  this  is  how  religion  and  God  have  made  this,  and  
men  are  supposed  to  be  the  breadwinners  and  the  managers  of  the  
house.  Thus,  these  values  were  derived  from  the  socio-cultural  and  
religious  norms.  Women  considered  men  as  the  ones  responsible  
for  fnances  and  decisions  related  to  money.  Some  even  went  to  
the  extent  of  sharing  their  belief  that  when  women-led  the  fnan-
cial  decisions  or  the  decisions  of  the  household,  and  its  fnancial  
transactions,  it  would  never  achieve  prosperity.  
A  deeper  exploration  revealed  that  this  is  derived  from  the  Is-
lamic  principle  of  Nafaqah  which  denotes  the  fnancial  support  that  
a  husband  must  provide  for  his  wife.  This  includes  both  during  the  
marriage  and  for  a  time  after  the  divorce  which  obligates  the  hus-
band  to  pay  for  his  wife’s  housing,  food,  and  clothing  in  the  course  
of  their  marriage.  Thus,  men  should  provide  and  make  decisions  
and  women  willingly  wanted  them  to  lead  the  fnancial  decision-
making  and  transactions  to  keep  up  these  values  and  resulting  
norms  practiced  by  the  elders.  
If  I  had  not  gone  into  this  phased  approach  and  made  eforts  to  
understand  women’s  perceptions  about  fnancial  transactions  and  
the  underlying  values  that  drive  these  perceptions,  I  would  have  
also  continued  to  explore  the  fnancial  applications  as  reasons  for  
this  lack  of  use.  
3.2  Islam  and  Rights  
Islam  is  at  times  associated  with  patriarchal  values  especially  when  
it  comes  to  women’s  rights  and  representation  in  religious  lead-
ership  roles  e.g.  women  are  excluded  from  leading  or  speaking  at  
religious  gatherings,  religious  prayers  where  women  are  supposed  
to  pray  behind  men,  etc  [2].  However,  Muslim  women  also  have  
many  rights  e.g.  married  women  can  seek  separate  residence  for  
themselves  and  their  children,  and  men  are  supposed  to  provide  for  
them.  Muslim  women  can  also  ask  for  payment  for  breastfeeding  
their  babies  or  can  seek  others  to  feed  their  babies  for  payment  as  
mentioned  in  the  Quran  chapter  Surah  At-Talaaq  which  translated  
to  ’The  Divorce’.  
Lodge  them  [in  a  section]  of  where  you  dwell  out  of  your  
means  and  do  not  harm  them  in  order  to  oppress  them.  
And  if  they  should  be  pregnant,  then  spend  on  them  until  
they  give  birth.  And  if  they  breastfeed  for  you,  then  give  
them  their  payment  and  confer  among  yourselves  in  
an  acceptable  way;  but  if  you  are  in  discord,  then  there  
may  breastfeed  for  the  father  another  woman.  Q65:6  
The  reason  for  listing  these  rights  is  not  to  provide  any  clarif-
cation  but  to  review  the  existence  of  rights.  Thus,  when  I  saw  a  
clear  gender  discrepancy  in  the  understanding  and  use  of  Digital  
Financial  Services,  my  frst  question  and  assumption  were  about  
women’s  rights.  Because  like  many  HCI  researchers  when  I  made  
observation  1  (about  women  not  making  bigger  fnancial  transac-
tions)  and  women  giving  up  their  fnancial  earning  to  men,  my  frst  
assumption  was  also  towards  the  oppression  and  patriarchy  that  
might  have  forced  them  to  act  in  this  way.CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
In  my  research  with  low-income  women,  many  women  told  me  
that  they  do  not  go  out  of  their  houses  to  go  to  the  banks  and  the  
mobile  money  shops  to  transact  because  of  the  fears  of  harassment  
in  the  public  including  in  public  transports.  Women  shared  that  
besides  the  acts  of  harassment,  and  they  feared  negative  interactions  
like  theft  and  mugging.  Lastly,  women  were  also  fearful  of  society’s  
negative  reactions  to  their  being  outside  without  a  male  chaperon,  
and  the  looks  and  stares  they  might  receive.  Some  women  even  
reported  being  scared  of  shopkeepers’  ill  conduct  with  women.  
Among  these  were  women  who  shared  that  they  were  happy  
that  the  men  are  dealing  with  the  fnances.  And  since  they  already  
have  a  lot  of  house  chores  including  childcare,  they  appreciate  men  
taking  some  of  the  tasks  from  them  and  that  they  do  not  have  to  
worry  about  going  outside  and  making  the  fnancial  dealings  and  
do  not  have  to  deal  with  the  men  in  the  society.  
4  RELIGION  AND  CONDUCTING  RESEARCH:  
ISLAM  AND  HIJAB  
In  Islamic  countries,  the  concept  of  hijab  or  the  veil,  known  as  Par-
dah  in  South  Asia,  takes  many  meanings  and  each  of  these  meanings  
is  based  on  the  perceptions,  interpretations,  and  norms  of  the  re-
gion  [19].  The  word  Pardah  is  a  Persian  word  that  means  curtains.  
This  word  has  been  used  to  understand  the  physical  curtain  used  to  
separate  men’s  and  women’s  gatherings  as  well  as  the  fabric  worn  
by  to  achieve  modesty.  The  hijab  or  covering  by  women  is  done  in  
many  forms  from  the  complete  coverage  where  eyes  are  visible,  to  
the  headscarves  which  cover  the  head  and  hair,  it  is  also  used  as  a  
chaddar  or  one  big  cloth  to  cover  the  head  and  body.  
Hijab  is  not  only  the  name  of  the  fabric  which  is  referred  to  as  
Khimar  that  is  worn  to  cover  (seen  in  the  frst  verse  listed  below),  
but  it  means  modesty  (seen  in  the  second  verse).  For  example,  in  
Quran,  we  see  both  of  these  teachings.  
O  Prophet!  Enjoin  your  wives,  your  daughters,  and  the  
wives  of  true  believers  that  they  should  cast  their  outer  
garments  over  their  persons  (when  abroad):  That  is  most  
convenient,  that  they  may  be  distinguished  and  not  be  
harassed.  Q33:59  
And  say  to  the  believing  women  that  they  should  lower  
their  gaze  and  guard  their  private  parts;  that  they  should  
not  display  their  beauty  and  ornaments  except  what  
(must  ordinarily)  appear  thereof;  that  they  should  draw  
their  khimar ¯  over  their  breasts  and  not  display  their  
beauty  except  to  their  husband,  their  fathers,  their  hus-
band’s  fathers,  their  sons,  their  husbands’  sons,  their  
brothers  or  their  brothers’  sons,  or  their  sisters’  sons,  
or  their  women,  or  the  slaves  whom  their  right  hands  
possess,  or  male  servants  free  of  physical  needs,  or  small  
children  who  have  no  sense  of  the  shame  of  sex;  and  
that  they  should  not  strike  their  feet  in  order  to  draw  
attention  to  their  hidden  ornaments.  Q24:31  
However,  beyond  the  physical  covering  through  the  fabric,  is  the  
more  important  concept  of  modesty  and  segregation  of  genders.  The  
later  concept  was  observed  in  my  research  fndings  multiple  times.  
Women  believed  that  by  going  outside  this  concept  of  segregation  
and  pardah  ends.  Similarly,  going  outside  and  talking  to  men  was  
also  seen  in  the  same  light.  Samia Ibtasam 
Islam  also  includes  a  concept  of  mehram  which  means  those  
who  are  related  to  you  and  cannot  be  married  to  because  of  close  
blood  relationship  and  from  whom  purdah  or  concealment  of  the  
body  with  hijab  is  not  obligatory.  The  reason  is  that  women  are  not  
supposed  to  engage  in  unwanted  interactions  and  communication  
with  men  who  are  not  related  to  them.  A  woman  communicating  
with  a  shopkeeper  is  not  unwanted  interaction  but  men  and  women  
engaging  in  random  communication  can  be  deemed  as  unwanted.  
All  familial  relationships  mentioned  in  the  second  Quranic  verse  
comes  under  mehram.  This  segregation  of  genders  creates  gendered  
norms  where  interaction  between  men  and  women  is  not  as  com-
mon  and  its  impacts  the  physical  and  digital  lives  of  these  men  and  
women.  In  the  sections  below  I  share  how  these  values  and  norms  
impact  research.  
4.1  Hijab  and  Fieldwork  
These  gendered  constructs  are  not  limited  to  the  participants  or  the  
populations  that  we  work  with,  but  it  also  impacts  us  as  researchers.  
4.1.1  Participants  and  Hijab.  When  I  went  to  conduct  feldwork,  
especially  for  the  Digital  Financial  Services  (DFS),  I  used  the  support  
of  existing  Microfnance  organizations  or  Non-Government  Orga-
nizations  (NGOs)  working  towards  supporting  the  lower-income  
strata.  However,  when  the  male  members  of  the  MFIs  or  NGOs  used  
to  accompany  me  to  the  participants’  places,  I  noticed  a  hesitation.  
Women  participants  had  to  be  very  careful  and  sometimes  had  to  
be  accompanied  by  the  male  members  of  the  family  to  participate  
in  the  study.  This  meant  that  women  were  not  only  limited  by  
the  availability  and  comfort  of  their  male  chaperons,  they  were  
also  conscious  and  at  times  uncomfortable  with  being  open  and  
detailed  in  their  responses  due  to  the  presence  of  males,  related  
or  otherwise.  Thus,  after  a  few  of  these  instances,  I  requested  the  
partner  organization  members  to  allow  me  to  conduct  one-to-one  
interviews.  
4.1.2  Researcher  and  Hijab.  However,  in  order  to  support  the  par-
ticipants,  it  meant  that  I  had  to  be  alone  in  their  selected  venues  
or  houses  or  MFI  ofces,  etc.  But  due  to  the  socio-cultural  norms,  I  
could  not  travel  to  these  places  especially  in  a  rural  setting  alone.  
The  safety  and  security  being  a  woman  and  the  sociocultural  norms  
of  women  never  traveling  alone  both  suggested  otherwise.  Thus,  
I  would  then  take  the  male  supporters  with  me  who  would  then  
wait  outside  the  interviewing  venue  for  me  to  talk  to  the  women  
participants.  
Another  dimension  of  my  gender  as  a  woman  and  researcher  
showed  up  when  I  recruited  men  for  interviews.  I  started  my  in-
terviews  with  the  assumption  that  gender  biases  would  not  exist  
because  I  am  introduced  by  the  MFI  as  "someone  visiting  from  the  
city  and  conducting  interviews"  and  my  profle  would  be  taken  as  
another  door-to-door  survey  collector  or  similar  entities.  However,  
again  the  pervasive  norms  became  visible  when  the  men  were  dis-
missive  of  my  questions  and  my  interviewing  of  women  for  the  
research  and  made  inquiries  about  my  work.  One  even  scofed  if  I  
was  any  kind  of  social  worker  from  some  NGO  trying  to  get  women  
some  rights  when  I  inquired  about  if  there  were  any  gendered  di-
mensions  in  the  fnancial  decision  making.For God’s sake! Considering Religious Beliefs in HCI Research : A Case of Islamic HCI CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
Figure  1:  Two  photographs  of  interviews  with  participants.  (Left)  Participant  and  interviewer  with  covered  heads  with  head-
scarf;  (Right)  Participant  has  covered  head  while  the  interviewer  has  uncovered  head  with  the  headscarf  fallen  on  her  neck  
during  the  conversation  
In  all  these  instances  I  would  ensure  to  cover  my  head  because  
all  women  covered  their  head  and  the  uncovering  of  the  head  was  
disrespectful  to  the  culture.  Due  to  the  lack  of  practice  of  covering  
my  head  regularly  or  due  to  the  types  of  fabric,  sometimes  the  head  
covering  fabric  would  slip  of  my  head.  At  one  time,  I  observed  a  
woman  participant  looking  at  my  head  as  I  looked  up  from  my  notes.  
This  also  pointed  me  to  the  possible  distraction  and  abnormality  of  
the  uncovered  head  and  thus  I  continued  to  ensure  the  headcover  
is  in  place.  
A  few  of  these  points  about  gendered  interactions  as  a  researcher  
have  also  been  hinted  in  my  other  works  [11,  12].  However,  my  
reason  for  sharing  these  is  to  draw  attention  to  these  research  
methods  and  the  diferences  and  uniqueness  that  can  be  introduced  
in  these  methods.  
5  RELIGION  AND  REPORTING  RESEARCH:  
ISLAM  AND  MUSLIMS  
5.1  Challenge  of  Reporting:  
HCI  community  focuses  on  the  nuances  of  research  questions  and  
research  populations  instead  of  converging  on  a  single  user  type,  
one  user  group,  or  one  defnition  of  a  group.  Thus,  it  is  imperative  
that  we  consider  and  report  the  various  types  of  Muslims,  the  difer-
ent  types  of  people  in  each  Islamic  country,  their  unique  cultures,  
their  lifestyles,  and  our  design  for  them.  And  we  do  not  reduce  any  
population  to  one  box.  
Some  of  the  nuances  mentioned  in  this  paper  till  now  might  have  
already  pointed  out  the  various  diferences  in  interpretations  and  
practices  of  Muslims  around  the  world.  However,  when  I  report  
many  of  these  fndings,  I  at  times  receive  feedback  that  I  should  
refer  to  papers  on  the  Middle  East,  etc.  I  argue  that  the  uniqueness  
and  brilliance  of  this  feld  are  in  discussing  and  embracing  identi-
ties  and  user  needs.  And  thus  a  realization  that  interpretations  or  
practices  of  Muslims  in  Pakistan  are  not  equal  to  those  of  Muslims  
in  Bangladesh,  Iran,  Afghanistan,  or  the  Middle  East.  And  the  same  
considerations  apply  to  Muslim  women  as  well.  As  I  shared  earlier,  
the  laws  and  practices  vary  greatly  for  all  Muslim  women  to  be  
identifed  as  the  same.  A  reviewer  once  inquired  in  one  of  our  works  the  diference  
between  the  terms  Islamic  and  Muslim  and  suggested  that  we  alter-
nate  the  use  of  Islam  with  Muslims.  Islam  is  the  name  of  the  religion  
and  those  who  practice  it  are  called  Muslims.  The  Islamic  values  are  
derived  from  the  Qur’an  and  the  life  of  the  Prophet  (SAW).  While  
Muslims  around  the  world  might  have  various  interpretations  and  
implementations,  replacing  Islamic  teachings  by  using  a  concept  
like  Muslim  teachings  is  unheard  of.  This  also  brings  up  the  impor-
tance  of  local  and  subject  expert  researchers  who  can  comment  on  
the  underlying  value  systems  to  review  such  works.  
5.2  Muslim  populations  and  Challenge  of  
Reviewing  
Another  challenge  faced  as  an  HCI  researcher  in  discussing  these  
populations  and  the  impacts  of  religion  in  their  daily  lives  was  in  
presenting  those  fndings  to  the  broader  HCI  community.  I  share  a  
few  of  them  below.  
• In my works where I presented these sociocultural values 
and how they impacted fnancial decision-making, HCI re-
searchers wanted me to add technical design recommenda-
tions to my work. How can we make more women use these 
fnancial services? A bigger question I struggled with was, 
why should I try to design to make these women want to 
give up on those values? 
• At one instance where I had shared that how Muslim women 
were comfortable with men leading the transactions both 
for religious reasons as well as to avoid "yet another chore", 
a reviewer claimed that this was reinforcing the patriarchal 
values. Similarly, at another instance, I had recommended 
that rather than designing to bring these women outside of 
their comfort zones, into the mobile money markets where 
other unrelated men exist, we can design for solutions that 
provide services to women in places where women are the 
most comfortable. This was called out for reinforcing segre-
gation. 
However, in sharing these experiences my view is that these 
values are deep-rooted and have a functional meaning to the livesCHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
of  these  individuals.  While  many  of  us  do  not  agree  or  relate  to  the  
value  or  experiences  of  these  women,  we  cannot  design  technical  
tools  and  challenge  existing  values  and  social  setups  because  of  our  
disagreements,  as  also  hinted  by  recent  works  focusing  on  design  
within  limitations  and  contexts  [21].  
5.3  Challenge  of  Defending:  
The  third  challenge,  which  is  an  important  one  for  us  as  researchers  
from  the  Global  North,  which  should  be  kept  in  focus  and  one  
that  diferentiates  Muslim  populations  is  the  recent  and  at  times  
negative  focus  on  Islamic  cultures  and  values  [16,  20].  As  a  Muslim  
researcher  who  is  from  and  works  with  Muslim  populations,  I  have  
observed  hesitation  among  participants  when  sharing  details  about  
their  religious  beliefs  or  practices  or  how  it  impacts  their  daily  life.  
This  hesitation  at  times  accompanied  the  need  to  clarify  themselves.  
While  it  is  my  opinion  that  this  constant  clarifcation  is  due  to  the  
associated  negative  images  associated  with  Sharia  (code  of  life  that  
all  Muslims  should  adhere  to)  [1,  16]  and  Islam  in  the  media,  I  form  
this  opinion  based  on  the  similarity  of  all  these  clarifcations  to  be  
more  neutral  or  liberal.  
As  an  HCI  researcher,  I  have  also  felt  the  need  to  be  more  de-
scriptive  in  my  work  as  I  continue  to  clarify  and  answer  many  
questions  about  the  faith  and  its  principles.  Feedback  that  equated  
Pakistan  with  Islam  in  Middle  East  or  Bangladesh  or  reinforcing  of  
oppressive  values  made  me  question  every  time  that  do  I  want  to  
conform  and  have  a  CHI  paper  or  should  I  explain  what  I  see?  Thus,  
as  HCI  researchers  we  need  to  acknowledge  and  understand  how  
the  pervasive  global  perspectives  impact  reporting  of  and  reporting  
by  the  participants  who  are  unclear  or  at  times  fearful  about  the  
reactions  to  their  belief  system  or  practices.  
6  DISCUSSION  
This  paper  presents  three  implications  of  religious  beliefs  on  HCI  
research  as  end-users  as  well  as  HCI  researchers.  These  implications  
impact  researchers  and  participants  in  the  collection  and  analysis  
of  data  impacts  us  as  authors  in  the  understanding  and  presentation  
of  data  and  as  HCI  reviewers  of  papers  that  include  the  mention  
of  belief  systems  and  their  impact  on  sociocultural  norms,  values,  
and  use  of  technologies  by  the  populations.  Other  researchers  have  
already  called  to  focus  on  research  and  design  beyond  the  popular  
narratives  e.g.  Jewish  HCI  [9]  and  Arab  HCI  [3]  etc.  
HCI  is  related  to  research  about  humans  and  all  our  studies  
and  research  methods  such  as  usability,  testing,  interviews,  and  
observations  are  dependent  on  human  interaction.  However,  belief  
systems  that  incorporate  various  value  systems  about  interaction  
with  digital  systems,  interaction  with  same  or  other  genders,  or  
travel  and  communication  outside  the  house  pose  deeper  under-
standing  and  even  reforming  our  research  methods  to  suit  these  
populations.  These  values  and  what  is  permissible  or  not  can  play  
an  important  role  in  what  kind  and  quality  of  interactions  can  and  
cannot  happen  between  the  researchers  and  the  participants  as  well  
as  between  the  participants  and  the  technologies.  These  norms  can  
alter  our  research  methods  and  how  they  can  be  applied.  Thus,  such  
implications  like  the  presence  and  absence  of  mehram  or  related  
men  as  well  as  same  or  opposite  gender  and  its  likely  impact  on  Samia Ibtasam 
the  participants’  response  are  all  things  we  need  to  consider  as  HCI  
researchers.  
Value  Sensitive  Design  recommends  that  technologies  are  not  
value-neutral  and  there  are  values  associated  with  individuals,  as  
well  as  groups  (collective  values)  and  technologies  [7].  And  we  
should  explore  these  further  to  understand  and  design  for  them.  I  
give  detail  of  my  work  to  showcase  how  these  values  are  impacting  
Muslim  users  in  their  processes  and  decisions  towards  technology  
understanding  and  use,  and  how  these  values  can  also  have  an  
impact  in  the  research  process.  
Presentation  and  reviewing  of  papers  is  an  important  part  of  
HCI  research.  However,  if  we  continue  to  establish  what  is  unique  
or  novel  and  what  is  similar,  based  on  our  understanding,  we  might  
be  eliminating  a  research  conversation  altogether.  Commentary  or  
feedback  that  questions  fndings  or  recommendations  as  reinforcing  
patriarchal  concepts  or  segregation  can  only  make  populations  and  
its  researchers  feel  inadequately  equipped  in  sharing  their  stories  
or  push  them  to  further  defend  their  stance.  
7  CONCLUSION  
Using  stories  from  HCI  research  in  an  Islamic  country  with  Mus-
lim  and  non-Muslim  populations,  I  share  the  various  assumptions,  
challenges,  and  opportunities  for  research  with  these  populations.  I  
use  these  stories  to  showcase  how  Islamic  principles,  beliefs  form  a  
strong  part  of  the  value  systems  and  lifestyles  of  Muslims  in  these  
countries  and  as  HCI  researchers  we  not  to  work  beyond  simply  
engaging  with  such  populations.  We  need  to  take  a  step  deeper  to  
understand  the  underlying  values  that  form  these  socio-cultural  
norms.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
I  would  like  to  thank  all  my  participants  for  their  valuable  time  and  
inviting  me  to  be  a  part  of  their  personal  and  professional  spaces,  
observe  their  lives  and  lifestyles  to  draw  these  conclusions.  I  thank  
all  the  reviewers  for  their  comments  and  feedback  which  helped  in  
improving  this  work  especially  Alexander  Muir,  Katta  Spiel,  and  
Konstantin  Aal  who  guided  on  how  to  improve  this.  I  would  like  to  
thank  Ibtasam  Sharif  for  his  support  and  Sudheesh  Singanamalla  for  
his  feedback  on  the  frst  draft.  I  also  acknowledge  the  International  
Fellowship  by  the  American  Association  of  University  Women  
(AAUW)  for  their  funding.  
REFERENCES  
[1] [n.d.]. Shariah | Defnition, History, & Examples. https://www.britannica.com/ 
topic/Shariah 
[2] 2019. The Case Against Patriarchy in Islam: Fitra, viceregency, and universal 
principles. https://ing.org/case-patriarchy-islam/ Section: Staf Blog. 
[3] Ebtisam Alabdulqader, Norah Abokhodair, and Shaimaa Lazem. 2017. Human-
Computer Interaction Across the Arab World. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI 
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1356–1359. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3027063.3049280 
[4] Mark Blythe and Elizabeth Buie. 2014. Chatbots of the gods: imaginary abstracts 
for techno-spirituality research. In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction: Fun, Fast, Foundational (NordiCHI ’14). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 227–236. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/2639189.2641212 
[5] Elizabeth Buie and Mark Blythe. 2013. Spirituality: there’s an app for that! (but not 
a lot of research). In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI EA ’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
2315–2324. https://doi.org/10.1145/2468356.2468754For God’s sake! Considering  Religious Beliefs in HCI Research : A Case of Islamic HCI 
[6] Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Leora F. Klapper, Dorothe Singer, and Peter Van Oudheusden. 
2015. The global fndex database 2014: Measuring fnancial inclusion around 
the world. World Bank (April 2015). https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm? 
abstract_id=2594973 
[7] Batya Friedman, Peter H Kahn, and Alan Borning. 2001. Value Sensitive Design: 
Theory and Methods. (Feb. 2001), 8. 
[8] Genevieve Bell. 2010. Messy Futures: Culture, technology and research. 
[9] Jessica Hammer. 2020. Envisioning Jewish HCI. In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’20). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3334480.3381818 
[10] Samia Ibtasam, Hamid Mehmood, Lubna Razaq, Jennifer Webster, Sarah Yu, and 
Richard Anderson. 2017. An Exploration of Smartphone Based Mobile Money 
Applications in Pakistan. In Ninth International Conference on Information and 
Communication Technologies and Development. ACM. 
[11] Samia Ibtasam, Lubna Razaq, Haider W. Anwar, Hamid Mehmood, Kushal Shah, 
Jennifer Webster, Neha Kumar, and Richard Anderson. 2018. Knowledge, Access, 
and Decision-Making: Women’s Financial Inclusion In Pakistan. In Proceedings of 
the 1st ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies (COMPASS 
’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 22:1–22:12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3209811. 
3209819 
[12] Samia Ibtasam, Lubna Razaq, Maryam Ayub, Jennifer R. Webster, Syed Ishtiaque 
Ahmed, and Richard Anderson. 2019. "My cousin bought the phone for me. I never 
go to mobile shops.": The Role of Family in Women’s Technological Inclusion 
in Islamic Culture. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, 
CSCW (Nov. 2019), 46:1–46:33. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359148 
[13] Pew Research Center | Religion and Public Life. 2015. The Future of World Religions: 
Population Growth Projections, 2010-2050. Technical Report. Pew Research Center. 
https://www.pewforum.org/2015/04/02/religious-projections-2010-2050/ 
[14] Joseph Liu. 2012. Religion in the News: Islam and Politics Dominate Religion 
Coverage in 2011. https://www.pewforum.org/2012/02/23/religion-in-the-news-
islam-and-politics-dominate-religion-coverage-in-2011/ 
[15] Maryam Mustafa, Shaimaa Lazem, Ebtisam Alabdulqader, Kentaro Toyama, Shar-
ifa Sultana, Samia Ibtasam, Richard Anderson, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. 
IslamicHCI: Designing with and within Muslim Populations. In Extended Ab-
stracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI EA ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, Honolulu, HI, USA, 1–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3375151 
[16] Asifa Quraishi-Landes. 2016. Five myths about sharia. Washington Post (June 
2016). https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/fve-myths-about-sharia/ 
2016/06/24/7e3efb7a-31ef-11e6-8758-d58e76e11b12_story.html 
[17] Md. Rashidujjaman Rifat, Jay Chen, and Kentaro Toyama. 2017. Money, God, and 
SMS: Explorations in Supporting Social Action Through a Bangladeshi Mosque. 
In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5941–5953. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453. 
3025960 
[18] Secunder Kermani. 2017. How Jinnah’s ideology shapes Pakistan’s identity. BBC 
News (Aug. 2017). https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-40961603 
[19] Faegheh Shirazi. 2003. The Veil Unveiled: The Hijab in Modern Culture (1st edition 
ed.). University Press of Florida, Gainesville. 
[20] Derek M. D. Silva. 2017. The Othering of Muslims: Discourses of 
Radicalization in the New York Times, 1969–2014. Sociological Fo-
rum 32, 1 (2017), 138–161. https://doi.org/10.1111/socf.12321 _eprint: 
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/socf.12321. 
[21] Sharifa Sultana, François Guimbretière, Phoebe Sengers, and Nicola Dell. 2018. 
Design Within a Patriarchal Society: Opportunities and Challenges in Designing 
for Rural Women in Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 536:1– 
536:13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174110 
[22] Department of Economic and Social Afairs United Nations. 2019. World Popula-
tion Prospects - Population Division - United Nations. https://population.un. 
org/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/ 
[23] Allison Woodruf, Sally Augustin, and Brooke Foucault. 2007. Sabbath day 
home automation: "it’s like mixing technology and religion". In Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’07). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 527–536. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240710 
[24] Susan P. Wyche, Paul M. Aoki, and Rebecca E. Grinter. 2008. Re-placing Faith: 
Reconsidering the Secular-religious Use Divide in the United States and Kenya. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 
’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11–20. https://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357057 
event-place: Florence, Italy. 
[25] Susan P. Wyche, Kelly E. Caine, Benjamin Davison, Micheal Arteaga, and Re-
becca E. Grinter. 2008. Sun Dial: Exploring Techno-spiritual Design Through 
a Mobile Islamic Call to Prayer Application. In CHI ’08 Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
3411–3416. https://doi.org/10.1145/1358628.1358866 event-place: Florence, Italy. CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
[26] Susan P. Wyche, Kelly E. Caine, Benjamin K. Davison, Shwetak N. Patel, Michael 
Arteaga, and Rebecca E. Grinter. 2009. Sacred Imagery in Techno-spiritual Design. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’09). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 55–58. https://doi.org/10.1145/1518701. 
1518710 event-place: Boston, MA, USA. 
[27] Susan P. Wyche and Rebecca E. Grinter. 2009. Extraordinary Computing: Religion 
As a Lens for Reconsidering the Home. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’09). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
749–758. https://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518817 event-place: Boston, MA, 
USA. 
[28] Susan P. Wyche, Gillian R. Hayes, Lonnie D. Harvel, and Rebecca E. Grinter. 
2006. Technology in Spiritual Formation: An Exploratory Study of Computer 
Mediated Religious Communications. In Proceedings of the 2006 20th Anniversary 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’06). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 199–208. https://doi.org/10.1145/1180875.1180908 event-place: 
Banf, Alberta, Canada. 
COMMENTARY  
Katta  Spiel  
Human-Computer  Interaction  Group,  TU  Wien,  Vienna,  Austria  
Before  entering  into  my  review  proper,  I  want  to  position  myself  
as  to  enable  fellow  reviewers  and  the  author  to  understand  my  
perspective.  I  was  raised  in  a  small  Bavarian  village  with  ingrained  
catholicism  and  went  to  Catholic  schooling.  However,  I  have  left  the  
church  later  on  and  am  now  not  embedded  in  formal  spirituality.  So,  
my  perspective  is  largely  shaped  through  being  White  and  being  
raised  Christian,  though  not  practicing.  All  my  knowledge  about  
Islam  is  second-hand.  
I  like  what  the  paper  is  set  out  to  do  and  I  think  it  makes  a  very  
good  case  in  terms  of  discussing  the  universalist  assumptions  that  
come  from  Global  North  institution  which  dominate  HCI  (and  re-
search  more  broadly).  Here,  I  think  the  author  would  enjoy  reading  
Serene  J.  Khader’s  book  ‘Decolonizing  Universalism  –  A  Transna-
tional  Feminist  Ethic’,  which  illustrates  this  well  for  feminist  de-
bates  and  the  value  dominance  and  judgement  (inappropriately  
and  in  decontextualised  form)  coming  from  White  women  in  the  
Global  North.  Additionally,  the  paper  really  shines  when  the  au-
thor  shares  their  rich  experiences  from  their  feldwork  and  how  to  
attend  to  participants’  value  systems  as  shaped  by  Islam  in  (rural?)  
Pakistan.  In  that  specifcity  lies  strength,  but  I  fear  at  times  the  text  
verges  on  overgeneralising  from  that  specifcity.  For  example,  the  
author  illustrates  how  Computer  Science  is  ‘not  a  topic  for  women’,  
which  I  do  not  want  to  question  as  the  author’s  experience  but  
this  might  not  be  the  case  for  all  Islamic  countries  –  as  seen  by  
the  high  percentage  of  women  in  Science  and  Engineering  in  Iran  
(see  https://www.forbes.com/sites/amyguttman/2015/12/09/set-to-
take-over-tech-70-of-irans-science-and-engineering-students-are-
women/).  Hence,  I  struggle  to  attribute  this  disparity  to  Islam  as  
such.  On  a  smaller  note,  while  I  appreciate  the  biographical  sketch,  
I  found  myself  missing  information  on  the  author’s  positionality  
regarding  their  religion.  I  fully  understand  if  this  was  a  choice  
and  am  happy  to  leave  it  at  that,  though  I  think  the  paper  could  
be  understood  better  if  the  author  would  disclose  whether  they  
themselves  are  a  Muslimah  or  not.  Further,  I  found  the  examples  
given  on  related  work  a  bit  one-sided  citing  predominantly  from  a  
single  (group  of)  authors.  As  I  am  not  intimately  familiar  with  this  
research,  there  might  just  be  a  small  group  attending  to  these  topics,  
though  that  could  be  specifed.  However,  the  main  argument  from  
the  abstract,  namely  that  religious  values  shape  the  engagementCHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
with  technologies  has  been  made  recently  in  a  Jewish  context  at  
this  very  venue  and,  I  think,  warrants  acknowledgement  (Hammer,  
2020).  As  a  reader  with  little  background  knowledge  regarding  Is-
lamic  culture,  I  stumbled  over  the  sentence  ‘The  teachings  shared  
from  the  Quran  also  in  this  work  is  what  forms  Islamic  teachings  
and  cannot  be  replaced  with  Muslim  interpretations.’  I  am  honestly  
just  not  sure  what  this  means.  Samia Ibtasam 
Reference: 
Jessica Hammer. 2020. Envisioning Jewish HCI. In Extended Ab-
stracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI EA ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 1–10. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3381818