Community Dynamics in Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons 
Learned from a Church-based mHealth Pilot 
Teresa K O’Leary Dhaval Parmar Stefan Olafsson 
oleary.t@northeastern.edu d.parmar@northeastern.edu stefanola@ru.is 
Northeastern University Northeastern University Reykjavik University 
Boston, MA, USA Boston, MA, USA Reykjavík, Iceland 
Michael Paasche-Orlow Timothy Bickmore Andrea G Parker 
mpo@bu.edu t.bickmore@northeastern.edu andrea@cc.gatech.edu 
Boston University School of Medicine Northeastern University Georgia Institute of Technology 
Boston Medical Center Boston, MA, USA Atlanta, GA, USA 
Boston, MA, USA 
ABSTRACT 
HCI researchers have increasingly examined how social context 
shapes health behaviors. Much of this work operates at the inter-
personal level. Communities such as churches play important roles 
in supporting wellbeing and addressing health inequities. While 
some work has investigated creating digital health tools for reli-
gious populations, few have explicitly focused on the incorporation 
of community support in the form of prayer support. Embedding 
health interventions in any community has the potential to support 
or challenge the community’s dynamics. We report on fndings 
from interviews with 17 church members who used a church-based 
mHealth application over a 4-week period and provide guidelines 
for developers based on these results. Through their use of the 
system, participants characterized several community dynamics 
including a desire for social intimacy, communicating care, creating 
opportunities for fellowship, maintaining privacy and discretion, 
and building community connections, and how these dynamics 
infuence their aspirations for a church-based health app. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI ;• 
Social and professional topics → Religious orientation . 
KEYWORDS 
mHealth, faith-based, community dynamics, technospiritual, African 
American, Black, social capital, historically marginalized communi-
ties 
ACM Reference Format: 
Teresa K O’Leary, Dhaval Parmar, Stefan Olafsson, Michael Paasche-Orlow, 
Timothy Bickmore, and Andrea G Parker. 2022. Community Dynamics 
in Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons Learned from a Church-based 
mHealth Pilot. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the 
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specifc permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9157-3/22/04...$15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3517700 (CHI ’22), April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3517700 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Researchers within and outside of the Human-Computer Interac-
tion (HCI) community have examined how technology, especially 
mobile applications, can support wellbeing in health domains such 
as but not limited to substance use [76], mental illness [109], and 
maternal and child health [20]. This work has increasingly been 
driven by an appreciation for the social context of health promotion, 
understanding that an individual’s social network and social ties 
can either advantage or disadvantage them [6, 8, 31]. Much of this 
work has examined interpersonal relationships in diverse health 
contexts and how these relationships and their infuence should 
be considered in the context of digital health [6, 74]. We acknowl-
edge that digital health can take on diferent meanings especially 
in transdisciplinary research areas. For the purposes of this work, 
digital health is defned as the use of “information and communica-
tions technologies (ICTs) in medicine and other health professions 
to manage illnesses and health risks and to promote wellness” [91]. 
Digital health is intentionally broad in defnition and scope as it 
includes but is not limited to the use of wearables, mobile health 
(mHealth) applications, web-based applications, and telehealth etc 
[91]. Research eforts in digital health are driven by work showing 
the advantages of both tangible and emotional social support, and 
the association of such support with positive health outcomes, e.g., 
improved weight management and increased physical activity [ 4], 
and reduction in postnatal depression [19]. An individual’s close, 
trust-based personal network not only assists in reducing negative 
health outcomes through social infuence and social support, but 
also provides access to health-enhancing material resources and 
knowledge, known as social capital [31]. Communities with high-
levels of social capital can promote normative health behaviors 
through the rapid spread of new health information and commu-
nity social norms and practices, and have the resources and skills 
to enact social change when necessary [8, 31]. 
In many communities in the United States (U.S.) churches are 
key sources of social capital and support, providing services and re-
sources such as food, shelter, legal support and informal healthcare 
opportunities to both church members and the broader commu-
nity [15]. In particular, churches play a central role in the BlackCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA O’Leary, et al. 
community in the U.S., driving social action and community mobi-
lization eforts to reduce social inequities and supporting political 
justice eforts [15, 87, 102]. Beyond explicit community health pro-
motion eforts, churches represent key cultural institutions where 
members connect through their shared experiences to exchange 
social support including spiritual and prayer support. This type 
of community support [32] has become even more critical during 
the COVID-19 pandemic where Black, Indigenous, and People of 
Color (BIPOC) have experienced signifcantly higher rates of dis-
ease, disability, death, and economic disruptions than their white 
counterparts [22, 72]. While health promotion programs in pre-
dominantly Black church communities have demonstrated some 
success, these programs are constrained by the church’s capacity 
(e.g., funding, volunteer burn-out, limited access to resources), and 
are accessible only to those members who can regularly attend 
church events [ 13]. These barriers signifcantly limit the ability of 
such programs to scale and sustainably serve church communities. 
ICTs ofer opportunities for addressing these challenges, present-
ing cost-efective ways of connecting church members and enabling 
greater access to and engagement with social and health promoting 
resources. Churches and their community members have increas-
ingly adopted ICTs inside and outside of formal worship settings, as 
is refected in a growing body of technospiritual research, i.e., tech-
nologies that support individual and/or collective spiritual practices 
or experiences [ 7, 114]. Since the COVID-19 pandemic, some faith 
communities have adopted remote worship practices using Face-
book Live, YouTube, or Zoom video conference software [46]. Some 
of these remote practices have allowed church members to con-
tinue small group meetings and other fellowship eforts typically 
found within the walls of the church. These trends together with 
increasing smartphone ownership [18] and the historically central 
role of churches in Black communities, present opportunities for 
exploring how digital health tools can address health disparities 
in church contexts. While some work has explored creating digital 
health tools for religious populations [7, 14, 58, 78, 114], few have 
explicitly focused on the incorporation of spiritual and prayer sup-
port as part of a health intervention. Moreover, these tools rarely 
incorporate a focus on spirituality, religious practice, or faith com-
munities, despite the vast number of digital health interventions 
and products that have been created commercially and in research 
projects. Given the previously stated health promotion benefts and 
afordances that churches ofer, there is a signifcant opportunity 
to investigate how digital health tools can be anchored in faith 
communities and designed to support a whole-person orientation 
of care, one that addresses multiple aspects of the person and their 
context including spiritual dimensions and is not strictly biomedical 
[32, 104]. In using the term whole-person, we do not suggest that 
we have addressed all dimensions of health and wellbeing. Rather, 
our work examines how an application that incorporates a trifold 
focus on wellbeing, community support, and spiritual practices 
can provide value to church members by addressing their physical, 
social, and spiritual wellbeing. 
We report on a 4-week feld study that is part of a larger iterative 
design process with participants from two predominantly Black 
church communities. Through an ongoing multi-year community-
engaged research project, we are investigating how technology can 
be co-designed to support health and wellbeing in historically Black church communities. We refer to health and wellbeing using the 
World Health Organization’s multifaceted defnition of health as 
“a state of complete physical, mental and social wellbeing and not 
merely the absence of disease or infrmity” [82], and the United 
States Center for Disease Control’s working defnition of wellbeing 
which describes wellbeing as an individual’s self-perceived “satis-
faction with life, fulfllment and positive functioning” [33]. In this 
paper, we will use the terms “health” and “wellbeing” interchange-
ably to describe an approach that includes physical, social, and 
spiritual health. We include the CDC defnition to acknowledge 
the value of an interpretivist orientation towards studying these 
concepts, that recognizes the importance of individuals’ subjective 
interpretation of their functioning. 
Our formative work revealed that our stakeholders (church mem-
bers and leaders) view health and wellbeing as interconnected 
concepts that are inextricably linked to spirituality. As such, we 
developed an application–Church Connect–that supports bodily 
health in a manner that features community support and spiritual 
practices. In this paper we report on participants’ experiences us-
ing Church Connect for four weeks, after which we conducted 
semi-structured interviews with participants. Our fndings address 
the following research question: How can technology be designed 
to support physical, social, and spiritual wellbeing within church 
communities? 
In answering this research question, our work makes empirical 
and design contributions that can help spur future HCI research at 
the intersection of health, community, and spirituality. First, our 
fndings characterize a set of community values and dynamics — 
processes through which communities change and develop—that 
shaped the way participants wanted to use the health, commu-
nity, and spirituality features within the Church Connect appli-
cation. Our fndings further demonstrate how these values and 
dynamics can in turn be shaped through engagement with the app. 
We contribute a set of community-level dynamics and values that 
are salient to church-based digital health intervention design, as 
well as to directions for future work that investigates and engages 
community values and dynamics when creating faith-based digital 
health tools in churches and other community settings. Second, our 
fndings characterize the value of digital health tools that jointly 
empower people to pursue their physical and spiritual health, and 
community aspirations. We use these fndings to articulate future 
directions for how to design digital health tools that take a multidi-
mensional approach to care. 
Our third contribution lies with our focus on digital health pro-
motion within historically Black church communities. The Black 
Church is a rich and important cultural environment. However, it is 
an environment that has rarely been studied within HCI, computer-
supported cooperative work (CSCW), and digital health research. 
Little digital health research has examined how to amplify the 
strengths of these communities, or explored what important consid-
erations must be made so that any technology introduced does not 
disrupt current community dynamics and processes. Given the in-
creasing work in the areas of technospiritual design, digital health, 
and social computing, work is needed to determine how technology 
can meaningfully and respectfully engage Black churches to enrich 
physical, community, and spiritual wellbeing. Our work represents 
an initial step in this space; we contribute a case study of digitalCommunity Dynamics in Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons Learned from a Church-based mHealth Pilot CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
health design and evaluation in Black church communities, the 
fndings from which we use to suggest directions for future inquiry 
and design in this space. 
Lastly, our qualitative fndings characterize the value of digital 
tools that jointly empower people to pursue their spiritual, health, 
and community aspirations. We use these fndings to articulate 
future directions for the design of digital health tools that take a 
broad approach to care. 
2 RELATED WORK 
Until recently, faith-based health promotion had not been translated 
to technology-enabled interventions. To date, few eforts explore 
the value of grounding digital health interventions in specifc com-
munity contexts like church communities [53, 99]. Our work ex-
plores the acceptability of an app that supports health in a manner 
that is grounded in a church-setting, and how existing community 
values may shape use of the Church Connect app. In the follow-
ing sections, we provide an overview of technology developed 
to actively build social capital in communities, health promotion 
technologies situated in community contexts, church-based health 
promotion programs, and existing faith-based health promotion 
technologies. Terminology used within this overview is consistent 
with the respective citations (e.g., Black or African American). 
2.1 Social Approaches to Health Promotion 
Digital health research has traditionally focused on the individual. 
Indeed the proliferation of self-quantifying, self-refection, and self-
improvement technologies have been egocentric with the user inter-
acting directly with the technology [74]. Increasingly, researchers 
are taking a social-ecological approach to their health interven-
tions, acknowledging that technology can play an important role 
facilitating interactions with others to promote health behaviors. 
Prior work has studied how technology can help individuals ac-
cess social support in their pursuit of behavior change [1, 74, 92]. 
For example, Murnane et al. found that people managing Bipolar 
Disorder not only use personal health technologies (i.e., digital 
tools used to self-manage and promote wellbeing) to support their 
interactions with mental health professionals but to facilitate in-
teractions with members of their social groups. There has been a 
proliferation of work focused on mediating interpersonal interac-
tions by encouraging users to support one and other in productive 
ways. One focus of this work has been health promotion in fam-
ilies, including research demonstrating how ICTs can encourage 
physical activity in the parent-child dyad. For example, Saksono et 
al. explored how social rewards incorporated within an mHealth 
intervention could motivate caregivers and children to complete 
their collaborative step count [ 92]. In their qualitative evaluation, 
the authors found that by centering participant values as a reward 
for completing a healthy behavior, their intervention facilitates 
what they call satisfying moments between the caregiver and child. 
Adams et al. present VERA, a mobile phone application that allows 
users to share photos documenting daily health decisions, leading 
to high levels of information support in the form of advice-giving, 
and esteem support (i.e., complements and short validations) [1]. 
These eforts show how personal use technologies can increase the 
depth of interpersonal interactions around matters of health and increase social support by building an individual’s social network 
around a health topic. 
Outside of existing social ties, researchers have explored how 
virtual health communities leverage shared experiences and ofer 
opportunities for computer-mediated social support. Lefebvre et 
al. present a review of surveys of user behavior on social network 
websites documenting their impact on health-information seeking 
and health-related behaviors [62]. The review shows that “social 
media and social network websites are moving us away from an in-
dividual view of health to one that encompasses social connections 
among patients, their families and caregivers, and their healthcare 
provider team.” Ba et al. found that there is a high level of corre-
lation between users’ exercise activities and their participation in 
these digital health communities, showing that online social net-
working activities and one’s support network motivate people to 
increase their physical activity [5]. 
In summary, a large body of work has demonstrated the critical 
role that interpersonal interactions play in helping people achieve 
their wellness goals and how designing for such factors is central to 
the creation of efective digital health systems. Despite the impor-
tant role communities can play in health promotion, this work has 
typically focused on interpersonal constructs (e.g., peer support, 
social infuence, normative behavior, role modeling)—considerably 
less work has examined how community values and dynamics can 
be drawn on and enhanced to better support health and wellbeing. 
2.2 Digital Health Promotion in Community 
Contexts 
Using a social-ecology of care model (i.e., a model that acknowl-
edges multiple factors that afect individual health [37]), we under-
stand that individuals operate within various social contexts, includ-
ing geographically-defned communities (e.g., neighborhoods) [85]. 
Community contexts can afect individual health and wellbeing 
by leveraging the assets and afordances of community-based or-
ganizations (CBOs). HCI and CSCW researchers have examined 
how socio-technical solutions are implemented and adopted within 
a variety of CBOs. This work has explored a broad set of topics 
ranging from civic engagement [34, 48, 59], community initiatives 
and resources [26], volunteer capacity [107, 108], and community 
activism [47]. HCI researchers have also explored how commu-
nity technologies can support health. This work has focused on 
a multitude of community contexts including but not limited to 
schools [9, 61, 65, 70, 89] and community centers [84, 86, 93]. 
Health technologies can also support wellbeing by facilitating 
social support and social capital. First conceived in the feld of soci-
ology, social capital has been conceptualized and reconceptualized 
by academics from the felds of political science and sociology, and 
operationalized in health promotion research [31, 67]. For purposes 
of this work, social capital “refers to resources developed through 
one’s social relationships” [30]. Individuals with high social capital 
have access to health-enhancing social relationships, such as those 
who can provide emotional support, model positive health behav-
iors, or provide tangible resources [31, 67]. Communities where 
social capital is high are associated with collective action and tend 
to have resource rich health promoting environments (e.g., parks,CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA O’Leary, et al. 
recreation areas, healthy foods, health services, community centers, 
libraries, schools). 
Community development researchers, policy-makers, and practi-
tioners have operationalized the concept of social capital using the 
asset-based community development (ABCD) framework. In recent 
years, HCI researchers have incorporated asset-based approaches 
into the design of community technology working directly with 
community members to identify community assets and to realize 
desired change in marginalized communities [21, 25, 26, 35, 111]. 
Outside of explicit asset-based design work, there has also been 
research that centered on building social capital in marginalized 
communities (e.g., refugee and new asylum seekers [45], economi-
cally distressed communities [27]) much of this work focuses on 
socioeconomic security [2, 3] or community engagement [48]. In 
addition, researchers have also explored how health journey spe-
cifc peer support communities [88] and general social media (e.g., 
Facebook) can be leveraged by some social networks to build social 
capital [29]. 
Other work has uncovered concerns over how digital health 
interventions in community contexts can create community ten-
sions [36, 51]. Kanstrup and Bertelsen, developed the MOVE app, a 
group-based application where app users can create, share, view, 
and commit to planned exercise-based activities with other users 
in their neighborhood [ 51]. Both residents and community health-
care workers raised concerns about who would handle maintaining 
and sustaining the lists of activities, with each group volunteer-
ing the other. This concern highlights the complexities of how a 
community-based health technology may create tensions between 
community actors. Similarly, Gooch et al. describe community mem-
bers’ concern over design concepts that encourage competition be-
tween neighborhoods (i.e., displaying community-level step counts 
in comparison to another community) stating that the competition 
could fuel inter-community tensions [36]. 
This work reveals that researchers recognize the importance of 
situating health interventions in various communities using social 
capital theory and asset-based approaches. Some of this work has 
explored how digital health interventions, anchored in community 
contexts, impact not just health outcomes but community values 
that drive or inhibit health and wellbeing. However, further health 
promotion research in faith communities is warranted as they aim 
to promote health and wellbeing for church members who, in other 
formal healthcare settings, may be difcult to reach [53]. Churches 
are essential in delivering culturally-informed health programming 
in trusted and familiar settings [12]. In particular, historically Black 
churches have long played a pivotal role in public health eforts to 
reduce health disparities that exist between African Americans and 
other ethnic groups [12]. 
2.3 The Role of the Black Church 
To better understand the context of our fndings, it is important to 
recognize the historical and contemporary signifcance of the Black 
Church to Black and African American communities. The Black 
Church is a term that refers to seven major Protestant denomina-
tions that serve predominantly Black members [69]. In using the 
term Black Church we do not mean to suggest that all churches 
that serve predominantly Black and African American people are monolithic or singular in their religious practices [75]. Rather, we 
refer to the Black Church to acknowledge its institutional, political, 
and societal importance and its role in the liberation of Black and 
African American people in the United States [75]. Firmly built 
outside of white society, Black churches were built, organized, and 
run by Black people [64], and while their role is certainly to serve as 
a house of worship, the cultural and social signifcance of these in-
stitutions is undeniable. Black Churches have acted as social service 
institutions and as places of safety and refuge providing protection 
to enslaved Black people and as the “backbone of the American 
Civil Rights movement” [64]. In contemporary society, the Black 
Church remains a powerful organization for both believers and non 
believers alike, as well as being a “cultural repository” [64]. It is 
through this history that we acknowledge the rich foundation that 
comprises how these churches and their members connect in ser-
vice to each other as well as to the larger community. The tenants 
of fellowship and ministry are cornerstones of these faith commu-
nities and thus shape church member values and expectations for 
technology in service of community wellbeing. 
The current reach of the Black church remains high with 79% 
of Black and African Americans stating that they are religiously 
afliated [73]. Given current racial and ethnic health disparities and 
the churches presence in Black and African American communities, 
predominantly Black Churches are well situated as sites for the 
provision of care to BIPOC [87]. 
2.4 Faith-based Health Interventions 
Twenty years ago, United States President Bush established the 
White House Ofce of Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships 
solidifying a partnership between the federal government and faith-
based organizations to better serve individuals from historically 
marginalized communities [87]. While this partnership was sus-
pended during the Trump-Pence administration, the Biden-Harris 
administration has reinvigorated the efort with community-aid 
focused on addressing COVID-19 related health disparities and 
race-based health inequities at the forefront of its agenda [44]. 
Such partnerships have made numerous church-based health pro-
motion programs possible supporting a number of predominantly 
Black church communities throughout the United States on a broad 
range of health topics, such as dietary changes [90], exercise promo-
tion [110], hypertension [56], advance care planning [42], substance 
use [50, 96], HPV vaccine promotion [55], promoting peer support 
for adults with advanced cancer [40], breast cancer prevention [23], 
and diabetes self-management [68, 94]. Such health promotion 
interventions typically incorporate a series of health education 
workshops delivered in the church. However, existing barriers can 
limit an intervention’s efectiveness, for instance programs wholly 
delivered within a physical setting can only be accessed by those 
who regularly attend church activities [13]. 
While digital health is a promising area of research that may 
increase intervention inclusivity, only a small subset of this work fo-
cuses on technology-enabled solutions for church members. Digital 
faith-based health interventions have been shown to successfully 
improve cardiovascular health [14, 78] and substance use [50] health 
outcomes in Black church contexts. The interventions designed 
have primarily leveraged short messaging service (SMS) [58, 78]Community Dynamics in Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons Learned from a Church-based mHealth Pilot CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
and health-focused technology features like goal-setting, educa-
tional messaging, self-monitoring behavior, reminders, and feed-
back on performance [14, 78]. In their CBT4CBT project, Jordan et 
al. used a church support group facilitated by lay community advi-
sors to administer their technology-enabled substance use program 
for church afliated Black adults [50]. While the intervention was 
individually-focused, its administration in a group-setting provided 
opportunities for social support and created a social network for 
participants who shared a similar health behavior. Similarly, New-
ton et al.’s hybrid diabetes prevention program utilized the church 
context by establishing regular face-to-face group sessions facili-
tated by a church member supplemented by a spiritually-tailored 
SMS intervention [50]. FAITH! an app developed by Brewer et al. 
is the only project that incorporated an app-based community so-
cial support feature (i.e., a group forum) in their cardiovascular 
health promotion intervention [14]. However, none of the digital 
health interventions for Black church afliated adults mentioned 
included community support features for capacity building. In addi-
tion, while some of these applications included spiritually-tailored 
health content (e.g., connecting Scripture or Bible stories directly to 
health behaviors in health education) none incorporated spiritually-
focused features or facilitated spiritual and prayer support for their 
priority populations. 
Outside the church community context, some HCI researchers 
have explored opportunities for technology to support spiritual 
practices and create spiritual experiences, e.g., prayer [7, 113], is-
lamic pilgrimages [66], and mindfulness practices [112]. Smith et 
al. examined the role of prayer support within the online health 
community CaringBridge, a patient-facing support exchange tool 
designed to help a user experiencing a signifcant health crisis share 
health updates with close family and friends [98]. Although Car-
ingBridge has no explicit religious or church community afliation, 
authors found that CaringBridge users rated prayer support as the 
most important social support exchanged through the website [98]. 
Their fndings speak to the fundamental value of spirituality as an 
underlying component of health and wellbeing. In later work, au-
thors conducted participatory design workshops with CaringBridge 
users to defne spiritual support. They defned spiritual support as 
“an integral dimension that underlies and can be expressed through 
social support categories including: prayer, instrumental, informa-
tional, emotional, network, and esteem support” [97]. With the 
exception of SoulGarden (a spiritual network visualization tool de-
veloped for hospitalized and chronically ill users to reduce stress 
and loneliness and increase a sense of belonging) [52] these tech-
nospiritual pursuits are typically outside the focus of digital health 
promotion eforts. 
Thus while church-based digital health interventionists have 
considered how to spiritually-tailor health content, they have not 
provided communal or spiritual support. Furthermore, to our knowl-
edge, prior work has not investigated how church-based digital 
health interventions that do incorporate community support fea-
tures may enhance or challenge pre-existing community values 
and dynamics in church communities. 3 METHOD 
This work is part of a multi-year project to design and evaluate a 
mobile application that promotes health and wellbeing in churches 
with predominantly Black memberships. During our frst year, we 
worked directly with church members using an assets-based ap-
proach to identify community strengths and to engage church 
members in the design of the application [80, 81, 99]. Using fnd-
ings from this formative work, we created the Church Connect 
mobile application. In this paper, we report qualitative results from 
our frst feld deployment, where 25 church members used Church 
Connect ¸during a four-week pilot study. Following the study pe-
riod, 17 of the 25 pilot study users volunteered to participate in 
a semi-structured interview with a research team member. In the 
sections that follow, we begin with an overview of the Church 
Connect application and then describe our study, including our 
methods and analytical approach. We conclude with refections on 
our research team’s positionality and ethical considerations. 
3.1 Church Connect Health App 
The Church Connect application provides users with multiple fea-
tures designed to support health, community engagement, and 
spirituality. 
3.1.1 Formative Work. Our initial goal was to explore how to de-
sign an mHealth tool to support wellbeing and health promotion in 
Black Church communities. We spent the frst part of the project 
engaging community members and conducting ten participatory 
design focus groups [80, 81, 100]. These focus groups explored 
various dimensions of participant experiences in their church com-
munities, e.g., religious practices, social support, community health 
priorities, and church member technology use [80]. We found that 
church members were not interested in a health behavior change 
app where their church’s role is merely providing access to the 
app. Instead, they conveyed a desire to have an app that engages 
them on a physical, spiritual, and community level [81, 99]. We 
ended this formative work by engaging participants in the design 
of preliminary concepts for the Church Connect app, allowing us 
to examine opportunities for spiritual, community, and physical 
health and wellbeing feature requirements. Table 1 provides an 
overview of the key design implications that we derived from our 
prior work, mapping each implication to the corresponding Church 
Connect features that we developed. 
3.1.2 Features and Design Rationale. Health and Wellbeing Content 
delivered by ECA. The application contains health education mod-
ules that address physical activity, nutrition and stress reduction 
based on the frst key design implication “prioritize health and 
wellbeing topics”. The application features Clara an embodied con-
versational agent (ECA) designed as a health counselor (Figure 1A). 
An ECA is a digital character designed to simulate face-to-face con-
versation utilizing both verbal and nonverbal behavior cues [16]. 
Through our formative work, participants co-designed the ECA and 
gave feedback on her name, persona, role as a peer health advisor, 
as well as identifed the health topics they would like the agent to 
address [81]. Clara was created using the Unity 3D game engine 
[103] and deployed on iOS and Android devices [79, 81]. Clara uses 
a hierarchical task-network based dialogue manager coupled withCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA O’Leary, et al. 
Figure 1: Images from the Church Connect app: a) the ECA Clara waiting for the user to respond using the menu, b) the church 
prayer wall, c) prayer request submission form, and d) prayer center push notifcation. The prayers shown are archetypal and 
are not actual prayer requests from participants. 
Table 1: Features Mapped to Key Design Implications 
Design Implication Feature 
Prioritize health and wellbeing top- Health and wellbeing con-
ics: 1. nutrition 2. exercise 3. stress tent & Logging 
[81, 100] 
Integrate content & features that ad- Spiritually-tailored health 
dress the value of spirituality [81] content, Bible story of the 
day, & Prayer Center 
Include features for church member Prayer Center 
support exchange [100] 
Include features for building church Prayer Center & Pastor An-
capacity [80, 81, 100] nouncements 
template-based text generation to drive ECA dialogue [10]. To in-
teract with Clara, church members select from an on-screen user 
menu updated at every turn of conversation. ECA synthetic speech 
is accompanied by conversational nonverbal behavior, such as hand 
gestures, procedurally generated using BEAT [17]. 
During the frst conversation with users, Clara introduces each 
health topic (nutrition, physical activity, and meditation) and ex-
plains the benefts of engaging in each of the health behaviors. 
From this introductory conversation, users are encouraged to select 
a wellness topic that interests them. Clara uses counseling tech-
niques from an established person-centered counseling method 
called motivational interviewing [71]. These counseling sessions 
with Clara are structured using principles of motivational inter-
viewing (e.g., expressing empathy, supporting self-efcacy, etc.), 
Figure 2: Images from the Church Connect app: a) the health 
behavior dashboard featuring a talk to Clara button and the 
user’s weekly health goal and b) the activity logger. 
where Clara plays the part of a motivational interviewer who assists 
users with defning and setting incremental behavior change goalsCommunity Dynamics in Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons Learned from a Church-based mHealth Pilot CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
by identifying user reasons for change. During the frst counsel-
ing session, Clara encourages the user to engage in conversations 
about the health behavior by asking them what they think about 
exercise or healthy eating, why they are interested in change, what 
barriers they are concerned will stymie their progress, and the 
benefts of the health behavior to them personally. Clara used this 
framework for both nutrition and physical activity. At the end of 
the initial counseling session, users can set an incremental goal 
such as increasing fruit intake by 1/2 a cup a day, or increasing 
their physical activity by 15 minutes a day. All goals are set on 
a weekly basis (Figure 2A). While Clara suggests goals based on 
the user’s current baseline behaviors, stage of change, and current 
population-level health recommendations based on gender and age, 
users are also able to increase or decrease the goal to suit their 
current level of self-efcacy, motivation, and degree of confdence. 
At the end of these initial counseling sessions, Clara provides an 
overview of app-based support users can draw on (e.g., post on 
the prayer wall to draw on community support, or follow up with 
Clara to receive health-related tips/suggestions, etc.). These initial 
counseling sessions lasted approximately 20 minutes. 
During weekly follow-up conversations, Clara employs ipsative 
health behavior change strategies to positively infuence behavior 
change (e.g, setting a new goal, providing feedback or problem 
solving) based on current behavior change best practices [39, 105]. 
These sessions are shorter and typically last 10 minutes. Should 
users check-in with Clara prior to their weekly follow-up, Clara 
encourages users to log their progress using the in-built activity 
logger and ofers motivational statements and afrmations (e.g., 
“you’ve got this”). In these instances, a session with Clara is only a 
few minutes long. 
Figure 3: Images from the Church Connect app: a) the agent 
with menu options for diferent types of guided meditation 
and b) an example of Scripture displayed on screen during 
the scripture-based meditations. Outside of the physical activity and nutrition motivational in-
terviewing sessions, Clara leads guided meditation sessions (Fig-
ure 3A). For these sessions, users can choose both an ambient 
background scene (e.g., snow falling, stars twinkling), as well as 
choose between a selection of ambient background music (e.g., pi-
ano, crashing waves, church bells etc.). Users can also specify the 
length of the meditation session (e.g., 5, 10, 15, or 20 minutes) as 
well as the type of meditation they would like to perform (e.g., body 
awareness, breathing exercises, scripture-based meditations.). Fol-
lowing our second design implication “integrate content & features 
that address the value of spirituality”, users can choose scripture-
based meditations. These sessions ask users to select a theme for 
meditation (e.g., love, faith, forgiveness, anxiety etc.). Once selected, 
Clara chooses a scripture related to the theme and presents it on 
screen (Figure 3B). Clara reads the Scripture out loud and asks users 
to refect on the Scripture throughout the session using refective 
prompts that ask users to consider how the Scripture impacts their 
life and current circumstances. Clara begins each meditation ses-
sion asking users to fnd a comfortable and quiet place to meditate. 
Through the meditations, Clara verbally cues the user providing 
step-by-step meditation instructions and prompts (e.g., “Continue 
to become more aware of God in his spirit and his son as you breathe 
now. Let your eyes become heavy with each deep breath, let your 
eyes softly close. Focus more and more on your breath.”). These 
sessions can last anywhere between 5 to 20 minutes based on user 
preference. Users were able to repeat these sessions as often as they 
liked. 
All health dialogue was spiritually-tailored to include content 
related to Christian faith. Focus group participants also worked 
directly with research team members to tailor agent-led health con-
versations to incorporate spiritual content related to Christian faith 
in a way that felt authentic, genuine, and culturally-situated [81]. 
Throughout the conversations, users are presented with both secu-
lar and spiritual options. Examples of spiritual responses include 
the following: “It sustains me to do the Lord’s work”; “It honors 
God’s temple, my body”; “I want to be a better steward of God’s 
temple”; “I’d like you to encourage me using scripture.” Clara then 
refects the user’s responses back later in the conversation, so they 
become part of the dialogue. In accordance with the second key 
design implication, “integrate content & features that address the 
value of spirituality” Clara also ofers a Bible story of the day. If 
selected, Clara would select a Bible story from our study database 
and read the story aloud to participants. Participants requested this 
feature during the fnal focus group discussion as they wanted a 
feature that exclusively served a spiritual focus. 
Logging. Following best practices for helping people achieve 
nutrition and physical activity goals, we implemented an activity 
logger (Figure 2B) that supports behavioral goal setting and physi-
cal activity self-monitoring [60]. The application shows a screen, 
accessible from the main menu of the app, where users may log 
their physical activity or nutrition. The logging interface displays 
the goal users are working towards, if they have set one, and lets 
users set new goals by talking to Clara (Figure 2A). Taking physical 
activity as an example, users can set goals for how many minutes of 
physical activity they plan to do for the next week, and the logging 
screen allows them to input the number of minutes they exercise 
on a given day of the week.CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA O’Leary, et al. 
Features Supporting Community Support Exchange & Spirituality. 
Based on the second and third key design implications, “include 
features for church member support exchange” and “integrate con-
tent & features that address the value of spirituality”, we designed 
two features to help users connect with their church community. 
The frst is a prayer center, which has a community prayer wall 
(Figure 1, B and C) and a private prayer list. All prayer center fea-
ture requirements were specifcations that focus group participants 
requested and/or evaluated favorably. In a similar manner to se-
quential group posts on contemporary social media platforms, users 
can post prayer requests and praise reports on a church-wide prayer 
wall. Prayer requests can be characterized as concerns, crises, or 
challenges (e.g., a family death, news of a terminal illness, anxiety 
over an upcoming job interview) that an individual would not only 
like to share with others in their community, but through their 
request, ask for communal support. Sharing praise reports allows 
people the opportunity to share expressions of joy or gratitude (e.g., 
getting a new job, recovering from an illness, engagements, births). 
Posting to the prayer center can be done anonymously or in an 
identifed manner. Posting to the prayer wall can be deeply personal 
and may place the poster in a place of vulnerability. Accordingly, 
the poster may not feel ready to post the information associated 
with their name. Allowing for anonymous public facing posts gives 
members fexibility regarding self-identifcation while asking for 
communal support. 
Users can publicly reply to prayer and praise posts, creating a 
means for church members to give and receive public acknowledg-
ment of communal afrmation. Users can also add posted prayer 
requests from the prayer wall to a private list of prayers only visible 
to them, as well as add their own prayers to their private list. In 
doing so, they can refer back to this list as a reminder during times 
of prayer. In addition, when a person adds a prayer request to their 
private prayer list the original poster is notifed to their phone with 
the message, “someone in your community has added your prayer 
request to their prayer list” (Figure 1D). 
If an inappropriate post is placed (e.g., inappropriate content or 
language, content that reveals private information about another 
member) members can immediately alert study staf. If a post is 
marked as possibly inappropriate, an immediate notifcation is sent 
to the frst author. Once received, the frst author would review 
the content and notify the community partner to determine if the 
content was inappropriate. This feature was never used during the 
study as no posts were deemed to be outside communal norms. 
The second community feature was based on the fnal key de-
sign implication, “include features for building church capacity”. 
In response to this design requirement, we developed Pastor An-
nouncements, a one-way communication channel from the pastor 
to congregants through the application. This allows church leaders 
to share content directly with their church community, such as 
information about events, words of encouragement, scripture, or 
church announcements. 
3.2 Study Overview 
Participant Recruitment. This work was done in collaboration with a 
CBO that provides services, programming, and fnancial support to 
over 100 faith-based organizations serving predominantly minority communities in a United States city located in the northeast. We 
refer to this organization as our “community partner”. Through our 
community partner’s network connections, we established a long-
standing relationship with two church communities. Church A is a 
historical Baptist church with approximately 600 members. Church 
B is an African Methodist Episcopal (AME) church with approx-
imately 700 members. Church members from both communities 
participated in the feld deployment. To be eligible, church members 
had to be 18 years or older, English-speaking, and have access to a 
computer, tablet, or phone where they could connect using video 
conference software. In coordination with church ministry leaders 
(i.e., leaders who represent diferent church afliated groups that 
provide services to both members and non members in the residing 
community) from both church communities, we advertised the feld 
study in both church e-bulletins as well as by word of mouth via 
church ministry liaisons who were actively partnering with our 
research team. Church members interested in participating were 
provided contact information for the lead author to schedule their 
frst remote study appointment. Due to the fact that we recruited 
via church ministries, almost all of our participants knew one an-
other as they shared social contacts within their respective ministry 
groups. Prior to recruitment, the study protocol was approved by 
our university Institutional Review Board. 
Data Collection. Participants were consented by a project mem-
ber over video conference, administered surveys and provided a 
brief tutorial on how to install the application and a direct link to 
download. Once installed, participants were asked to use the appli-
cation at least a few times per week for the 28-day study period. 
After their fnal study day, participants were contacted by the lead 
author to schedule a semi-structured interview. Interviews were 
conducted no more than one week post participation in the feld 
study. Participants were given the option to talk by telephone or 
video conference for the semi-structured interview. Participants 
were compensated at a pay rate of $24 an hour for both the initial 
study session, an hour of application use over the 28-day period, 
and the follow-up semi-structured interviews. Total compensation 
was $84 per study participant for a total of 3.5 hours. The semi-
structured interviews averaged 75 minutes. 
Given the numerous features and health behaviors that par-
ticipants could engage in using the Church Connect app, usage 
statistics were obtained and reviewed prior to the semi-structured 
interview. The lead author annotated the interview guide with over-
all usage statistics for each health and technospiritual component. 
In doing so, the interviewer prioritized time based on actual use 
and was able to probe on why certain aspects of the system were 
not used more. 
During interviews, participants were asked for their overall im-
pressions using the system and probed component-by-component 
to elicit their attitudes, preferences, and motivations for using or not 
using diferent areas of the system (e.g., explicit health features ver-
sus technospiritual features). In addition, participants were asked 
the following questions: 1) to what extent did they see Church 
Connect as making use of or strengthening their community? 2) in 
what ways did Church Connect refect or fall short of their commu-
nity values? and 3) in what ways would participants like Church 
Connect to incorporate connections to others to more efectively 
support wellbeing within their community?Community Dynamics in Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons Learned from a Church-based mHealth Pilot CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
Data Analysis. Interviews were audio recorded and transcribed, 
resulting in a total of 18 hours and 24 minutes of audio fles and 
845 pages of transcription. We conducted an inductive analysis 
informed by grounded theory of semi-structured interview content 
guided by sensitizing concepts such as community strengths, de-
sires, and values as they relate to health promotion [11]. We used 
elements of the grounded theory method, including open coding, 
axial and selective coding, and memo writing [101]. While we un-
derstand the value of incorporating community members directly 
in the analysis, we were unable to involve participants in this stage 
of our research. Using NVivo 12.6.1 software, the frst author in-
ductively coded all transcripts, labeling emergent phenomena in 
the data to arrive at a codebook. The frst and last author met reg-
ularly during the analysis process to discuss discrepancies in the 
applications of the codes, review analytic memos, and refect on 
contradictory data. 
3.3 Positionality Statement & Ethical 
Considerations 
We acknowledge that there are ethical considerations when part-
nering with marginalized communities and that how we handle 
these issues should be shared with the wider academic research 
community. In the following subsections, we address our position-
ality as a research team and refect on the ethical issue of ensuring 
that participants continue to have access to research technologies 
even after their formal participation in the research process ends. 
3.3.1 Positionality Statement. Positionality statements are an im-
portant aspect of community-engaged research especially when 
working with marginalized populations [28, 63, 95]. Given that 
researchers often defne research questions, lead data collection 
and analytic processes, and are responsible for the communication 
of our results, we must acknowledge the power we have as practi-
tioners in not only shaping the interpretation of our work but in 
shaping the feld. And though our team was well-intentioned, we 
cannot claim that our self-identifed race and religious identities do 
not implicitly impact the questions we asked and the analyses we 
performed. Thus, we join others in our community in providing our 
positionality statements so that readers can examine our fndings 
with this knowledge [63]. 
The authors of this paper come from a range of faith and racial 
and ethnic backgrounds. Multiple authors grew up and two continue 
to attend various Protestant churches. One author is a religiously 
observant Jew. One author self-identifes as Black, another as South 
Asian and the remainder are white. The frst author who facilitated 
all participant activities and led the qualitative data analysis self-
identifes as a white woman. The frst author was raised attending 
a Catholic Church and school. She currently attends a multicultural 
Unitarian Universalist Church. 
We share our backgrounds to acknowledge that, while the au-
thors of this paper shared some religious vocabulary with church 
members, there may be nuances unique to the participants’ reli-
gious communities and cultural practices that we missed or that 
participants did not feel comfortable fully exploring with us [41]. 
3.3.2 Maintaining Research Technologies in Marginalized Commu-
nities. Prior work has highlighted ethical issues surrounding the introduction of research technologies and the subsequent harm that 
removing such technologies can cause once formal participation 
in the research process has ended [106]. We introduced Church 
Connect to two church communities during this feld study. As 
previously mentioned, this feld study is part of a larger multi-year 
project. Given the long-term nature of our project, our team ac-
tively maintains the application as part of our iterative process of 
design, development, and evaluation with our community partners. 
Part of our ongoing work will be to identify a long term solution 
for sustaining and transferring the Church Connect app to the 
church communities beyond our current multi-year community 
engagement. 
4 FINDINGS 
Through our iterative co-design process with community stake-
holders (i.e., church members and leaders), it became clear that 
participants wanted an mHealth app that incorporates spiritual and 
social components that church members identifed as valuable to 
their community. Accordingly, we undertook a co-design process 
to create Church Connect. 
Our fndings characterize participants’ engagement with and 
reaction to Church Connect, as well as their perspectives on how 
future tools can be designed to efectively promote wellbeing in 
church communities. Participants refected on their desires for an 
app that builds on and enhances their community values, as a way 
to strengthen not only the health of their bodies but also the church 
community and their ability to engage in valued spiritual practices. 
Drawing upon their experiences with the Church Connect app, 
participants characterized their perceptions of social cohesion (i.e., 
sense of closeness and solidarity shared among group members [30]) 
and elaborated on how certain community values and community 
dynamics (i.e., processes through which communities change and 
develop) are reinforced, enhanced, or disrupted through technol-
ogy. Furthermore, church members used their experience with the 
system to imagine how additional community-based features may 
leverage existing values and dynamics to augment the efectiveness 
of Church Connect to promote social cohesion and increase social 
capital i.e., resources developed through group membership [30]. 
In combination, these perspectives on community values and dy-
namics represent important insights into designing technology that 
supports people by building upon a church community’s strengths 
and minimizing community disruption. 
4.1 Participant Overview 
Twenty fve church members used the Church Connect app during 
the study period. Fourteen were from Church A and eleven from 
Church B. Demographics: Nineteen church-members self-identifed 
as Black or African American, two self-identifed as Black and 
American Indian, two self-identifed as Black and Latinx, one self-
identifed as Latinx, and one self-identifed as white. Eighteen 
self-identifed as women, fve self-identifed as men, and two self-
identifed as non-binary. Participant ages ranged from 19 to 75. 
For education, one participant reported having a high school de-
gree, three participants reported having had some college, three 
had an Associates degree, nine had a Bachelors degree, fve had 
a Masters degree, three had a professional degree, and one had aCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA O’Leary, et al. 
Doctorate. Participants have been members for an average of 14 
years (SD = 8.9, Range: 4-31). They range from no involvement in 
any church afliated groups to serving multiple roles in the church. 
These roles include attendee, co-pastor, ministry leader, fundraiser, 
Bible study leader, choir member, and trustee. Seventeen church 
members participated in the feld deployment interviews reported 
in this paper. 
4.2 Church Connect App Usage 
Before describing our qualitative fndings, we begin with a brief 
overview of Church Connect’s usage. During the four-week feld 
study, 25 participants used the app 560 times with each partici-
pant logging in to the app an average of 22 times (Min=4, Max=54, 
SD=13.3). Participants posted 82 prayer requests, added 43 prayer 
requests to private prayer lists, and wrote 45 replies on the prayer 
wall. Participants in Church A each received one pastor announce-
ment, whereas Church B received two pastor announcements. Par-
ticipants interacted with Clara for 36.6% of their sessions with the 
app. Participants used the meditation feature 84 times, Bible Story 
of the Day 50 times, Physical Activity 26 times, and Nutrition 25 
times. Participants used the logging feature a total of 801 times, 
with each participant, on average, logging their health behaviors 32 
times. Given that Clara is designed as a central component of the 
application, she delivers the majority of content outside of pastor 
announcements and the prayer wall. As a result, participants inter-
acted with Clara more compared to any other app component or 
community feature (e.g., the prayer center). It should also be noted 
that we did not capture passive usage of the prayer center, and as a 
result do not know the frequency by which church members may 
have checked for new content, reviewed posts on the prayer wall, 
or utilized their private prayer lists. 
These usage statistics reveal that the spiritually-focused and 
community-focused features were used more than the physical 
activity and nutrition counseling sessions with Clara. To explore 
this discrepancy, we feel it’s important to highlight how each of 
these features were framed. For instance, the Bible story of the day 
feature provided new content every single day in the form of a new 
Bible story, setting the stage for daily usage. In addition, there were 
three types of guided meditations, fve types of scripture-based 
meditations all of which could be tailored based on user music pref-
erences, background scene selections, and time-based preferences. 
Users were encouraged by Clara to join her multiple times a week to 
meditate and could partake in meditation as frequently as they de-
sired. In contrast, the physical activity and nutrition sessions were 
framed as weekly interactions with Clara. If users returned prior to 
the 7-day followup, Clara would ofer a short tip and ask them to 
log their health behavior. Otherwise, the majority of the wellness 
content was ofered on a weekly basis (e.g., providing feedback on 
a goal, setting a new goal, or problem solving). Therefore, how the 
nutrition and physical activity content was framed compared to 
the other components may be in part why the physical activity 
and nutrition sessions were used less when compared to the other 
features. 
In addition, participants explained that at the time of the feld 
study (March-May 2021), the continuation of the COVID-19 pan-
demic was causing immense strain on their mental and social wellbeing. Participants reported that their social connections with 
friends, family, and other members of their church were eroding 
and that the efects of long term isolation were taking a toll on their 
mental wellbeing. 
Beyond the trauma and strain of the pandemic, participants 
explained that the collective racial trauma of George Floyd’s murder 
also impacted their use of Church Connect. George Floyd was an 
African American man residing in Minneapolis Minnesota [43]. 
While in police custody, he was murdered by the arresting police 
ofcer, Derek Chauvin, on May 25, 2020. George Floyd’s murder 
was flmed and shortly after the murder went viral. After his murder, 
protests against police brutality swept across the United States and 
global community. At the time of the participant interviews, Derek 
Chauvin’s murder trial was ongoing. Participants acknowledged the 
importance of physical activity and nutrition overall but explained 
that the combination of the pandemic and continued police brutality 
inficted on Black people diminished their interest in the wellness 
content. Participants noted that devoting time and their limited 
energy to what seemed like a less acute problem was not high on 
their priority lists. P17 shared: 
“You gotta understand, I know that these things [nu-
trition and physical activity] matter. And it’s great 
that it’s there. But, when you’ve been living like this 
and you’re going day in and day out exhausted from 
the pandemic and the news with...I’m not even going 
to say his name [Derek Chauvin]. The eating better 
or working out more was just asking me to do things. 
And I can’t do any more. But, hearing a Bible story 
and closing my eyes or doing a breathing exercise 
that’s...that’s what I need right now.” 
Participants explained that compared to nutrition or physical activ-
ity, Bible stories of the day, daily meditations, and the prayer wall 
ofered comfort as well as a personally meaningful and identity 
afrming way to address the stress of the times through spiritual 
and community support. In the remainder of this paper, we present 
fndings that characterize how participants used these spiritual and 
community features, why they used them, and the impact of their 
use. We use our qualitative fndings to provide a more nuanced 
picture of participants’ engagement with Church Connect and their 
perspectives on how such holistic digital health tools should be 
designed in the future. 
4.3 Community Dynamics: Promoting Social 
Intimacy 
Throughout our interviews, participants emphasized the value they 
place on building and maintaining close personal relationships 
within the church community. In this paper, when we refer to social 
intimacy we mean the value placed on facilitating the development 
of close friendships with others in the church community. Church 
members explained that even prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, cre-
ating opportunities to nurture social intimacy was a priority in both 
churches. Participants described meetings devoted to increasing 
communication between church ministries and other small groups 
as well as creating programming for church members to meet others 
based on diferent types of interests and needs. Church ministries 
are largely volunteer-based groups that provide supportive servicesCommunity Dynamics in Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons Learned from a Church-based mHealth Pilot CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
to church members, community members, and to church services 
directly. These ministry groups nurture the church’s mission to 
serve the local and broader community. Examples of ministries 
include prayer groups, arts ministries, community service groups. 
P4: “I know for some ministries, they create oppor-
tunities to sit together on Zoom. I think the [name 
redacted] ministry spends time together making their 
own crafts and chatting. But, that’s rare—not all the 
groups have that” 
Participants explained how meeting new people and fnding oppor-
tunities to bond over shared experiences is difcult both during, 
but also prior to the pandemic. This challenge was driven in part by 
individual routines and family schedules that drove what worship 
time an individual attends, making it difcult to meet members who 
attend diferent service times. While the majority of participants 
described a deep sense of community and belonging (e.g., P2: “the 
church does feel like a, one big family ”), other participants shared a 
sense of isolation and loneliness: 
Int: do you feel like, really connected to other people 
there? 
P4: “Hmm. I think I better plead the ffth on that one. 
Because I feel like I’m on the outside looking in.” 
Regardless of the participant’s sense of belonging in their church, 
all participants felt that building a sense of social intimacy is a 
priority. P17 explained how this is even more important for new 
community members: 
“I’m one of those I already have established connec-
tions...But I know from hearing from others and work-
ing in diferent areas of ministry, that it’s important, 
especially when they come in as new members to 
make a connection. And that can be hard with the 
size of our church.” 
P17’s and P4’s insights provide examples of how communities high 
in social cohesion are at times difcult for outsiders to access. 
4.3.1 Developing Social Intimacy through the Prayer Wall. Our par-
ticipants went on to discuss the ways in which Church Connect, 
particularly the prayer wall, supported the community value of 
social intimacy. To understand the context of our fndings, it’s im-
portant to describe how prayer request posts in Church Connect are 
diferent from typical posts on a community forum. First, posting 
on a prayer wall is a request for reciprocity from a community 
predicated on caring for one another through faith, prayer, and 
social support. Secondly, it is a call to others within the community 
to participate in a communal and highly valued and honored spiri-
tual discipline. Previous work in HCI has further illuminated that 
for religiously afliated people spiritual support is an underlying 
dimension of all social support categories and that prayer support is 
an additional social support category [97]. In their work exploring 
spiritual support used in an online health community, Smith et. al., 
defned prayer support as a triadic experience which includes the 
prayer requester, prayer partner, and the Sacred. Members shared 
the power of prayer throughout the interviews stating that while 
prayer is often a deeply personal act of communication between oneself and God there are instances where building a prayer commu-
nity is a powerful display of togetherness, fellowship, and devotion 
to one another. By gathering in prayer: 
P13: “we become one voice and God will answer that 
person’s prayer. And we have seen prayers, you know, 
answered. So I just know that, you know, I know, um, 
I, and like probably most people say, “God, I would 
like you to do this for me now.” Well, we all have to 
wait. But it’s...good for people to know that others 
are waiting and watching with them and they’ll soon 
be rejoicing together. ” 
When asking participants how they felt about the prayer wall 
compared to Facebook, church members stated that Facebook is 
not a safe online environment and that the prayer wall is an asyn-
chronous means of communicating with God, practicing a spiritual 
discipline, and supporting fellow church members. Participants 
further stated that on Facebook their religious beliefs and values 
are not always shared with others in their Facebook community. 
Furthermore, given recent political and social events in the United 
States (e.g., the 2020 United States Presidential election, collective 
racial trauma due to police violence, and the COVID-19 pandemic), 
participants largely perceived a site like Facebook as a hostile space 
for BIPOC that lacks credibility due to its perceived role in the 
propagation and spread of misinformation. In contrast, they per-
ceived the Church Connect prayer wall as a largely safe space to 
self-disclose a need for prayer and engage in a communal spiritual 
practice with people who share a similar cultural identity. 
Through their use of Church Connect, participants showed how 
certain features enhanced social intimacy by creating authentic 
opportunities for communication ofine. P10 emphasized: 
“I saw someone, you know, on the prayer wall, who I 
don’t necessarily talk to but I see them intermittently, 
but if I saw them on Zoom I would be like “hey,” like 
how is that person or like how was your trip? Imagine 
being able to see details on the prayer wall and like 
begin a foundation for more.” 
Essentially, the ability to view the prayer concerns of others gave 
this participant new information about the poster, creating a foun-
dation for a more personal interaction outside the app. 
In addition, the prayer wall created a general awareness of what 
church members are struggling with or challenged by giving mem-
bers insight into who requires assistance and what matters they 
could personally connect on. P13 described the importance of reach-
ing out to members personally: 
“The pastor believes in community. And he looks for 
us to all be part of reaching out to anyone if it, whether 
it’s, uh, like during this COVID time and he said, if 
you haven’t heard from somebody pick up the phone 
and call and see how they’re doing.” 
The prayer wall aforded members opportunities to connect on 
new topics that might either remain undiscussed during church-
related activities or remain unaddressed until those activities take 
place. As a result, participants imagined that the prayer wall could 
beneft their community by allowing members to share their prayerCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA O’Leary, et al. 
concerns as they happen potentially to those who have shared a 
similar path. P7 stated: 
“So like COVID-19, somebody was ... One, one of our 
members got COVID-19, and you know, his wife sent 
us [the same ministry] all a note. He said he felt really 
good by the fact that three or four of the guys who 
also had COVID-19 came out on their own, basically 
got on the phone and prayed with him. And they 
called him, and he was in hospital. So, you know, it’s 
having a group of people who had a similar malady, 
praying with you. That’s incredible stuf.” 
Though this interaction happened by phone, P7 reported how the 
prayer wall could allow for this type of practice to occur across a 
variety of mutual experiences. He stated that for COVID-19, people 
generally know who’s had it because the church has provided those 
with support publicly. However, other mutual experiences such as 
substance use, mental illness, chronic health conditions, disabilities 
etc. are not so easily known. Thus, a computer mediated mecha-
nism for sharing personal experiences can act as a springboard for 
creating mutual bonds. Furthermore, P7 describes that connecting 
this way is not simply important because it enables identifying oth-
ers with like experiences but rather such connections are powerful 
because they can support the valued spiritual practice of prayer 
support. 
4.3.2 Supporting Community Health and Wellbeing through Social 
Intimacy. When discussing how future iterations of the Church 
Connect app could leverage their church community to further 
their health and wellbeing goals, participants wondered if a match-
ing feature could assist them in fostering buddy relationships with 
current church members based on their health goals, health chal-
lenges, shared experiences, or interests. Members stated that cur-
rently there is no well-defned mechanism for naturally making 
these buddy relationship matches within their current churches. 
Participants described how the COVID-19 pandemic has made this 
practice even more difcult, with the majority of church interactions 
hosted on video conference software that do not efectively support 
hallway interactions with members. Participants were similarly 
dissatisfed with health behavior change smartphone applications 
(e.g., Noom or Weight Watchers), fnding that the community com-
ponents (e.g., group forum and health coaching supports) did not 
feel relatable. P14 stated: 
“the advice I was getting from the coach just, I couldn’t 
connect with it kind of thing, but I did give him the 
feedback about it feeling... that this was much more 
focused on...a certain age, you know. You know...I’m 
not going to work, working out with friends, or drink-
ing beers so... it’s not really ofering me any kind of 
help for the situation I’m facing.” 
Participants brainstormed how such connections could create op-
portunities for initiating activities outside of the application: 
P10: “it’s just another tool for us to connect. Uh, and, 
and it’s a, you know, as a church body. Um, and, and, 
and be there for one another and with one another. 
You make that connection, and then hey if I’m going to do my walking, I can reach out to this person now 
and we can meet up as walking partners.” 
And members insisted that virtual health communities that are not 
anchored in their church context are not efective. P11 declared: 
“Oh, here’s what I know for absolute certainty. I am 
no good with Noom, I’m no good with Weight Watch-
ers online, I’m no good with anything that is strictly 
interactive and online. That is not me. It does not 
work, it will not work. I don’t even pretend anymore. 
I need...my church community.” 
As the quotes in this section on social intimacy begin to high-
light, many of participants’ aspirations for the Church Connect 
application were centered on it taking a whole-person orienta-
tion—integrating health promotion with community engagement 
and spiritual practices. 
4.4 Community Dynamics: Communicating 
Care 
In addition to social intimacy, members identifed caring as an im-
portant community value driving church services and activities. 
The value of community service both in-reach (e.g., serving church 
members directly) and out-reach (e.g., supporting local, regional, 
or global community initiatives) is a priority and one of the main 
missions of both church communities. Participants explained that 
since the COVID-19 pandemic, their typical volunteer activities 
have been disrupted. Members expressed a desire to serve their 
community directly and found that the prayer wall created an op-
portunity for an actionable and meaningful way to provide prayer 
support. When asked how it felt viewing the prayer wall, P4 stated, 
“it made me feel good, it was something I could do for them.”. Church 
members explained that in their communities “we make sure ev-
eryone is covered ”. When asked how it felt to respond to a posted 
prayer request P10 stated: 
“It felt good. I felt like there was something signifcant 
and meaningful that I could do for someone’s life.” 
The caring value is an intrinsic part of both church communities 
that is closely associated with the phenomena of reciprocity (i.e., 
the provision of support based on the notion that others from 
the community will respond in kind [83]). However, in religious 
communities, caring for others is another type of spiritual practice 
that brings both the care recipient and caregiver closer to God [97]. 
Church Connect’s prayer wall creates additional mechanisms for 
demonstrating caring (e.g., the reply feature). 
4.4.1 Providing Immediate and Intentional Prayer Support. Cur-
rently, outside of the Church Connect application, church members 
from both communities are able to submit a request for prayer 
publicly during their video conference worships, or during syn-
chronous remote based prayer meetings called prayer conferences. 
However, church members pointed out that through the Church 
Connect prayer wall they are able to ofer prayers, encouragement, 
and support with greater immediacy. P16 shared the benefts of the 
wall in terms of caring for members of the community: 
“it’s defnitely a place for people to, to say, you know, 
can you please pray for me in this situation. Otherwise 
we have the bulletin but the prayer is down at theCommunity Dynamics in Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons Learned from a Church-based mHealth Pilot CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
bottom or at the back, you know, this, this [Church 
Connect] is more intentional. And, it will be like a 
quick format. Like you [the poster] wouldn’t have to 
wait till Tuesday to call, to ask for it, to be put in the 
bulletin you can just go there [to the prayer wall] and 
just do this on your own in the, in the moment. When 
you need it.” 
Multiple participants pointed out that reading the prayer posts as 
they are posted and written by the requester themselves felt even 
more genuine than requests at the back of the church bulletin. The 
practice of being able to add the prayer to your Church Connect 
prayer list, thereby sending the passive push notifcation to the 
poster as well as the ability to post a reply in the public thread 
created opportunities to respond to the poster with “intention”. The 
prayer wall created a front-and-center prayer request environment 
allowing participants to access prayers, act on prayers, and respond 
to prayers in a direct and immediate manner. 
4.4.2 Supporting a Wider Range of Health Challenges. Members 
stated that the addition of the prayer wall in the Church Connect 
app was not duplicative of their current prayer conferences or 
prayer requests printed in the church e-bulletin. Participants de-
scribed how using the mobile application, they felt that prayers 
could be added to the wall for milder health situations. P8 explained: 
“A lot of times, you know, the past we announced 
certain things but those are worst case scenario situa-
tions. Someones in the hospice, or someone is on their 
way out [terminally ill] but sometimes, some people 
are just going through mild situations or challenges 
or maybe it’s a, you know, friend, right.” 
Calls for prayer to the entire church community by church leaders 
is typically reserved for health crises or extreme situations, and thus 
participants discussed how Church Connect ofers an additional 
mechanism for receiving support around health challenges that 
aren’t necessarily dire. We found that the app enhances the commu-
nicating care dynamic by creating a platform to support everyday 
health challenges through community and spiritual support. 
4.4.3 Identifying Member Needs for Focused Outreach. Five out of 
the 17 participants self-identifed as ministry leaders and spoke 
about how they planned on using Church Connect to support mem-
bers of their community and their ministry directly. For instance, 
one participant leads a Bible study group and states that the prayer 
wall would be part of the application that he would enjoy using to 
make sure that everyone in his ministry is receiving the spiritual 
support they require. Similarly, a health ministry leader indicated 
wanting to use the application to get a better sense of what members 
of her ministry needed in a more timely manner: 
P4: “Well, the alerts that we get [alerts sent by Pastors], 
we usually have to wait till Sunday. Um, somebody 
could post those daily [using the app]. Um, if some-
body is sick, or if there’s been a death in a family. And, 
um, then we could get on it ’cause we send cards and 
we make calls and texts and things like that...it would 
make the information that we receive as ministry 
members, uh, even more timely. And, um, it could be 
specifc.” By alerting members in the Church Connect community that prayer 
support is needed, participants who occupied leadership positions 
imagined how Church Connect could create opportunities for more 
focused and rapid service allocation to those community members 
in need. 
4.4.4 Disrupting the Communicating Care Dynamic. Church mem-
bers illustrated how the action of posting a prayer concern places 
the poster in a vulnerable position, and that responders feel a strong 
sense of responsibility and accountability to those members who 
are submitting requests for prayer. While the phenomenon of the 
social pressure to respond on social media is not completely new, 
this phenomenon embedded in the practice of spiritual and prayer 
support makes it complex. 
Participants explained that unrealistic expectations for posted 
replies could lead to feelings of isolation for the prayer poster. 
While members appreciated the ability to reply to the individual 
who posted, some mentioned how the public nature of the reply 
made them worry that others in the community who posted a 
prayer concern would wonder why they hadn’t replied directly to 
other posts on the wall. P17 shared: 
“I guess maybe this is it. You have these people on, 
and maybe some prayer requests you wanna respond 
to, and then some you don’t, but somehow, when you 
did, it was there for everybody to see, and it was kind 
of like, whoa, she didn’t, she didn’t, she didn’t reply 
to mine. That made me pause a bit”. 
In fact, in a separate interview a diferent member mentioned that 
they were surprised that more people from the church commu-
nity did not make an efort to reply to other prayer concerns. P10 
lamented: 
“I was really surprised that a certain person didn’t 
respond, that kind of hit me.” 
Similarly, one participant shared his disappointment that members 
of his ministry hadn’t responded to his post: 
“It was confusing once I wrote it, and then I came 
back, I didn’t get the level of response from certain 
people who I knew. Like the guys from my Men’s 
group. That felt bad.” 
In summary, while the Church Connect app enhanced the com-
municating care dynamic in some ways (e.g., ofering opportunities 
to receive more immediate prayer support) it also challenged the 
communicating care dynamic by creating new expectations for 
digital prayer support (e.g., the burden of responding immediately). 
4.5 Community Dynamics: Adjusting 
Community Scope to Maintain Privacy 
In addition to communicating care, another set of community dy-
namics revolved around the topic of privacy. Participants’ use of 
Church Connect inspired conversations around the importance of 
maintaining church member privacy when using aspects of the 
church-wide application, mainly the Church Connect prayer wall. 
While all members endorsed the prayer wall as a valuable aspect of 
the application, some shared concerns over how privacy could and 
should be maintained when members post prayer concerns. P13 
shared this concern:CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA O’Leary, et al. 
“I had to be mindful about how much health infor-
mation I was putting on the prayer wall, because I 
realized that it’s more widely shared with others in 
my church.” 
Church members emphasized wanting to keep the space safe and 
continued to use discretion through the study period by curating 
posts to limit personal information and specifcs. Participants stated 
that the subject matter of a prayer concern often contains private in-
formation about another church community member. For instance, 
a post asking for prayers with regard to a family member’s chronic 
condition or diagnosis posted without the permission of the family 
member could create issues and would have to be managed appro-
priately by community members (e.g., establishing procedures for 
taking down the post, establishing guidelines for protecting other’s 
privacy when posting). P17 stated: 
“what if somebody put up a prayer request and some-
body else knew that person and, you know, they kind 
of got into a verbal battle of what was actually the 
need for a prayer. Or, even question why the frst 
person put the prayer up in the frst place.” 
Through the interview, P17 explained that prayer posts made about 
others could be inaccurate. Moreover, she described how tensions 
over whether or not the prayer should have been posted is also a 
concern. 
Participants ofered solutions for the perceived privacy problem. 
One such solution was altering the audience size of the prayer wall 
to allow for varying levels of detail in the prayer concern posts. For 
instance, one church member described wanting to post a prayer for 
his Men’s Bible study but felt that posting the prayer church-wide 
would feel both impersonal and reveal too much private information. 
P3 shared: 
“I wanted to share a prayer request about Men’s Bible 
study, something specifc that only those guys know 
about. But..But..I couldn’t fnd a way to limit the post. 
But, that would have been a nice way to really ask for 
prayers around something close to my heart.” 
Other church members echoed this desire, sharing that sometimes 
prayer support from a curated small group not only reduces feelings 
of vulnerability but may be more responsive in that those prayer 
supporters are privy to the context surrounding the post. Giving 
participants the ability to adjust the social confguration would 
also support the community values of social intimacy and caring. 
On the opposite end of the spectrum, another participant spoke of 
widening the scope of the post so broadly to lessen the feeling of 
vulnerability through anonymity. P5 reported: 
“Well, I think being able to post to more than just your 
church that’s a good idea. Um, but just because I just, 
you know, it’s a bigger community. Someone might 
fnd, um, you know, they may fnd, um, a bigger com-
munity less intimidating. There’s a lot of people who 
don’t wanna share, about personal stuf you know, 
where they get [spiritually] fed.” 
Our fndings illuminate a contrast between the idea of sharing 
prayer concerns to a specifc subset of people within the church 
versus a large group of people beyond the church. Both sentiments stem from a desire to ameliorate feelings of vulnerability when 
asking for prayers. On one hand, participants hoped to accomplish 
this by shrinking their audience to those they feel close to. In 
contrast, others desire an audience so large that their post is one of 
many; P5’s quote suggests that this desire may stem from feelings of 
intimidation when sharing with a small community. While our data 
does not directly explain where these feelings stem from, possible 
explanations include not feeling a sense of connection to the larger 
community that makes sharing feel comfortable, or having sensitive 
health concerns that one does not want those in their closer-tie 
network to be privy to. 
4.6 Community Dynamics: Creating New 
Opportunities for Fellowship 
While members expressed the importance of managing privacy 
when using the app, they also identifed fellowship as an important 
community value intrinsic to their overall health and wellbeing. 
Church members described fellowship in their church as coming 
together to share space with those who share one’s values. At the 
beginning of the session, participants were asked to share three 
words that describe their church. “Fellowship” and “family” were 
selected the most with 10 of the 17 participants including them in 
their church descriptions. This resonates with related work fnding 
that fellowship is defned as a strength in historically Black church 
communities [100]. In this initial pilot phase, Church Connect was 
introduced remotely to a small group of individuals from each 
community. Due to the pandemic, participants reported important 
ways in which their community had changed. During the four-
week deployment, both church communities were shut down and 
all in-person services were suspended. While Zoom activities for 
ministries and church services did continue, participants lamented 
that they were unable to introduce Church Connect or use the app 
with others from their church. P7 stated: 
“But- but I really wish, it’s- it’s the thing that, the 
thing that plagued me more than anything else was 
that I really didn’t have a chance to have a discussion 
with other people within the church by sitting down 
and actually sharing the app with them. So, I never 
got to talk with them about it and get a sense about 
their thoughts.” 
He and other participants insisted that as part of their own decision-
making process about how, when, and to what extent to use the app, 
they wanted to know the opinions and thoughts of other members. 
Even as the app was just introduced, participants immediately 
mentioned wanting to use Church Connect together as a fellowship 
activity. P16 stated: 
“I think I’d like to be able to have used it more in a, 
just in an interactive situation with people, with other 
people from the church. Getting their thoughts and 
going through the app together.” 
When asked what specifc Church Connect content they wanted to 
explore with other members, P16 reported both the prayer wall and 
health modules delivered by Clara. In all interviews, participants 
introduced the concept of hybrid programming that leverages both 
in-person and app-based activities. Even with only a small numberCommunity Dynamics in Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons Learned from a Church-based mHealth Pilot CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
of church members using the app, two participants shared anec-
dotes where they recommended parts of the app (e.g., Clara guided 
meditation) during a remote video conference ministry meeting to 
another member of the church community: 
P13: “I brought up, and that’s from my experience 
with Clara and the meditation because the recommen-
dation, the frst recommendation was for the person 
to, um, to meet with our Men’s group. And then what 
I said was, I think that he’s a busy person, so the frst 
thing he needs to do is calm down. And I said, and 
meditation would be, you know, the best thing frst 
to learn how to get quiet.” 
Other members explored how interest in aspects of the applica-
tion could create health and wellbeing initiatives in the church 
community itself. Some participants felt that the app could assist 
in structuring church-wide cooperative health challenges. While 
others brainstormed instances where Church Connect could assist 
in responding to current church member needs. For instance, P11 
remarked: 
“I think that if there was a component that was um, 
specifcally um, called the church health ministry-Or 
something like that, then that allows you to um, ad-
dress whatever kind of the health topic Du Jour is 
[going on]. Whatever, we might be dealing with...to 
delve into diferent kinds of topics that members are 
truly struggling with. For instance if a lot of my mem-
bers are struggling with blood pressure, we could use 
the app to address those topics” 
Church members shared that people within the community are 
often in a variety of spiritual places and have diferent levels of 
familiarity with scripture and the Bible. P8 stated: 
“You know, there are some people who are lower in 
knowledge. Sometimes the higher-knowledge individ-
uals have a tendency to overpower the grouping, but 
with [the app] I can hear myself think and still be part 
of the conversation.” 
Creating additional platforms for refection could promote an inclu-
sive environment allowing users of varying levels of expertise to 
participate (i.e., those learning scripture as opposed to those with 
scriptural expertise). Indeed, in all communities there are varying 
levels of expertise around any topic—similarly, this will be true of 
health knowledge. Thus, for those communities where fellowship 
and togetherness is a central tenant, establishing creative ways to 
increase representative participation could be useful. 
In summary, participants shared how the Church Connect App 
could create fellowship opportunities ranging from using the app 
together, recommending parts of the app to each other, creating 
initiatives based on prayer posts or in-app content, and creating 
spaces for varying levels of expertise. These suggestions for future 
features refect a desire for tools that jointly engage health, spiritual 
and community values. Participants saw value in tools that promote 
health through features that spur church member fellowship online 
and ofine. 4.7 Community Dynamics: Building 
Inter-Community Connections 
In addition to church-wide fellowship, church members identifed 
building community connections to facilitate fellowship with other 
organizations as a community dynamic. All participants were aware 
that our partner organization provides resources and assistance to 
a network of predominantly African American and Black church 
communities. Participants were also aware that multiple church 
communities were using the system at the same time. Both during 
recruitment and in the interviews, participants expressed want-
ing to connect to and network with other church communities 
using the Church Connect app for a variety of health, spiritual, 
and social pursuits. Our partner organization serves and connects 
over 100 faith-based organizations in the region, and while lead-
ers may have access to their resources more directly, participants 
explained that church members typically are unaware of what 
the other church communities within the organization ofer. It’s 
customary that churches have public events open to the rest of 
the community, however, advertising those events widely to mem-
bers of other churches seems limited. Our results further confrm 
recommendations from related work on the importance of facili-
tating access to inter-community resources [80]. Beyond access to 
a greater variety of resources and people, participants explained 
that tying the network together could make them “feel like you are 
part of something bigger. I think that God wants us to branch out”. 
P6 points out how creating a larger, more accessible network of 
those with a shared faith tradition is not only empowering, but also 
spiritually fulflling. 
Several ministry leaders when interviewed suggested that hav-
ing a mechanism for announcing their own events to the broader 
community would be helpful. P11 stated: 
“I had wanted to start this COVID-19 grief support 
group. We’ve lost so many people, especially the older 
of us. But, I wanted it to be circulated, not just our 
church. But, I had no way of really getting it out there.” 
A pastor mentioned using the app to give participants access to 
events and services ofered by other churches stating that if one 
ministry addresses a topic at their church, then their own ministry 
could address another pressing topic. Through such resource coor-
dination, churches could ofer a greater variety of quality services 
to church members throughout the region. 
These results highlight that building community connections is 
valued for two reasons: it supports increased care provision through 
resource coordination, and provides spiritual fulfllment by being a 
part of something “bigger”. 
5 DISCUSSION 
We created the Church Connect app with features that promote 
physical wellbeing, support social interaction among church mem-
bers, and spiritual practices. Our study fndings characterize partici-
pants’ reactions to a church-based mHealth app that aims to deepen 
social ties and spiritual practice for members of a church commu-
nity – and their perspectives on how tools can further support such 
eforts in the future. 
Our fndings further highlight participants’ desire for health 
promotion tools that support church community values and socialCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA O’Leary, et al. 
dynamics. First, through our evaluation of Church Connect, we 
identifed a set of community values that participants identifed 
as integral to the design of digital health tools for church commu-
nities: social intimacy, caring, fellowship, privacy and discretion, 
and inter-community connections. Second, we conceptualize com-
munity dynamics as processes of change and development within 
communities, such as the ways in which social connections are 
forged and broken, or the ways in which social capital is built and 
wanes. Bringing these concepts of community values and dynamics 
together, our fndings characterize how Church Connect supported 
community dynamics—shifts in social interactions and community 
characteristics that helped participants realize their community 
values and instances in which these values were challenged. In 
the following subsections, we build upon our fndings to examine 
opportunities for the design and study of health technologies that 
respond to and recognize community values and dynamics, and that 
support a technospiritual and communal approach to wellbeing 
promotion. 
5.1 Engaging Community Dynamics to 
Mobilize Social Capital in Faith Communities 
Community Informatics is a feld of study concerned with the design 
and evaluation of technology that promotes “community processes” 
and practices [38]. It follows then that to support health, Community 
Health Informatics would frst identify the processes and practices 
used by a community to support health (e.g., collective social capital 
and community dynamics) and mobilize these practices through the 
careful implementation of technology. One way of doing this would 
be to examine diferent social confgurations within the community 
and discern how each type of confguration can be engaged to 
support wellbeing through the mobilization of collective social 
capital. In our study, participants discussed altering the scope of 
community within Church Connect by fexibly minimizing and 
expanding their audience to support physical, social, and spiritual 
wellbeing. 
In each of our Community Dynamics Findings sections, we dis-
cussed participants’ proposals for various social confgurations that 
could support diferent forms of social capital. In the feld of soci-
ology, researchers have defned three types of social capital. They 
are bonding, bridging, and vertical social capital [31] (Table 2). 
Table 2: Types of Social Capital 
Type Defnition 
Bonding Social Strong network ties form close personal bonds 
Capital that provide emotional support. 
Bridging Social Weaker social ties between members create a het-
Capital erogeneous network that enables greater access 
to material resources and informational support. 
Vertical Social Vertical ties between people who occupy diferent 
Capital places in an institutional hierarchy create oppor-
tunities to access a greater number of resources. These three types of social capital are associated with both in-
dividual and community positive health outcomes [8, 31]. In the 
health promotion community-based literature, researchers demon-
strate that anchoring health promotion in community contexts 
is a way to build upon existing assets as a means of supporting 
community health [8]. However, we cannot assume that the intro-
duction of technology alone can nurture the necessary community 
relationships that build social capital. In our interviews, partici-
pants expounded on their desire for social intimacy to develop 
friendships in the church community that lead to enhanced social 
support (e.g., expressions of empathy, validation, acknowledgment 
and prayer support). At the same time, participants admitted that 
these close ties can exclude others and limit the heterogeneity of 
their social network (i.e., newcomers have difculty forging social 
connections). Indeed, an ability to add diversity and widen the 
scope of one’s network provides additional benefts in the form of 
greater access to information and material resources [31]. While 
discussing community values, participants described how diferent 
social confgurations within the Church Connect app could build on 
each value thereby increasing social capital to promote community 
health and wellbeing (Table 3). 
As we have shown thus far, participants described opportunities 
for design at increasing levels of scale: from interpersonal buddy 
relationships to small group interactions to community-wide en-
gagements and they did so across physical health and spiritual 
domains. As mentioned in section 4.3.2, participants brainstormed 
mechanisms for Church Connect to create buddy relationships, one-
to-one peer partnerships, by matching peers with similar health 
experiences, goals, and challenges. Participants felt that the Church 
Connect could meaningfully augment care provision in their com-
munities through the linkage of members who might not otherwise 
meet. Participants also felt Church Connect could leverage their 
existing relationships to support wellbeing. Participants discussed 
how the app could catalyze small group formations to ensure that 
support provision is not reliant on the availability of one buddy, 
and how the app could support small groups with similar health 
interests (e.g., walking, meditation, nutrition). In section 4.6, we 
highlight how members also expressed a desire for additional health-
focused features that included the entire church community, such 
as church-wide health challenges and announcements of health-
related events (e.g., invited speakers, group exercise classes). At a 
wider scale, intra-community features could aford members access 
to health-enabling material resources (e.g., diferent skills among 
community members), and information. Finally, as mentioned in 
section 4.7, participants discussed how building inter-community 
networking between church communities could beneft their col-
lective social support by connecting individuals across community 
organizations. Through a wider network of CBOs, church members 
can leverage institutional power, and engage in inter-community-
wide civic activities. The greater heterogeneity of the networked 
community would create a diversity of opportunities that are fur-
ther reaching than previously possible. 
Together, participants’ recommendations help to paint a picture 
of the diverse ways that digital health tools that emphasize both 
health, wellbeing, and community support can help catalyze com-
munity engagements at various social scales, as a way to generate 
multiple forms of social capital within and between communities.Community Dynamics in Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons Learned from a Church-based mHealth Pilot CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
Table 3: Design Opportunities for Varied Social Confgurations and their Connection to Community Values 
Design Opportunities Community Values Social Capital 
Buddy relationships matched on shared identities or mutual experi- Social Intimacy, Caring, Privacy & Discretion Bonding 
ences 
Small groups based of of existing community formations Social Intimacy, Caring, Privacy & Discretion Bonding/Bridging 
Small groups newly formed based on a health goal or mutual health Fellowship, Caring, Privacy & Discretion Bonding/Bridging 
experience Church-wide health challenges Fellowship Bridging 
Announce inter-community health events 
Inter-community prayer wall Community Connections, Privacy & Discretion Bridging/Vertical 
Inter-community health challenges 
Future work should examine the afordances and challenges of 
varied social groupings in and between churches. Churches with 
predominantly Black memberships are historically associated with 
high levels of social cohesion and a strong sense of solidarity or 
belonging [69]. While other community contexts may also share a 
common identity and value system, they also may be more hetero-
geneous. 
Future work in Community Health Informatics should iden-
tify how a studied community is already mobilizing social capital 
and identify opportunities for augmenting these eforts. This work 
should focus on understanding how community members currently, 
and in the future, would like to engage with others in their com-
munity generally and around health and wellbeing specifcally. In 
our work, we found that participants valued social intimacy and 
that they would like to use the Church Connect app to promote 
health through the development of close friendships. We encourage 
community health informaticists to study the community dynam-
ics of importance for each of the social confgurations identifed 
by community members. For instance, researchers should identify 
the important values, processes, and interactions that community 
members prioritize for community development generally and for 
health and wellbeing specifcally. Once identifed, technology can 
be developed to enhance these dynamics and limit their disruption. 
We call on HCI researchers to examine how supporting community 
dynamics through design can strategically build each form of social 
capital as a means of health promotion. 
Conducting work in this area will require particular sensitiv-
ity when addressing health topics that are more controversial or 
sensitive. The current set of health topics addressed in the Church 
Connect app were wellness-based (e.g., physical activity), with ar-
guably less stigma surrounding them than topics such as mental 
health and substance use. Additionally, some health topics (e.g., 
vaccine hesitancy and vaccine promotion) come with strong and 
conficting beliefs in the general public, and thus addressing them 
introduces multiple levels of complexity that warrant further study. 
Future work should investigate these delicate health contexts, to 
identify implications for design and the impacts of tools that ad-
dress sensitive health topics in church settings. For instance, how 
might disseminating a tool focused on stigmatized topics such as substance use change church member expectations for maintain-
ing privacy or disrupt the community’s sense of social cohesion? 
Questions such as these must be examined to avoid threatening 
the social capital within churches and to identify opportunities for 
engaging churches’ social capital to support community wellbeing. 
5.2 Mapping Community Dynamics in 
Community-engaged Work 
In their systematic review of church-based health programs, Lasater 
et al. applied a framework for classifying if a church-based health 
promotion program is faith-based or merely faith-placed [57]. This 
framework provides researchers with a classifcation system to 
examine the level of involvement of a CBO in a health promotion 
intervention when implemented by academic research partners. 
The framework specifes four levels (Table 4). Although these four 
levels of involvement were designed to assess the degree to which 
a religious organization was involved in the design, development, 
and dissemination of a health promotion program, this framework 
can be applied to a variety of CBOs. 
Asset-based community development framework (ABCD) moves 
this further stating that an intervention or planned program should 
not only involve community members, but that any community 
development program should augment current organizational prac-
tices and build community capacity [54]. In ABCD, researchers 
take a multi-level systems approach and identify individual, group, 
and local institution assets (Table 4). Lasater’s level of organiza-
tion involvement views the community as a one-dimensional en-
tity. Whereas in ABCD, community is defned with both a micro 
and macro lens and takes into consideration how diferent social 
groupings within a community can aford various assets. As of late, 
community HCI researchers have incorporated ABCD approaches 
into their standard research practices [21, 26, 35]. 
We believe that utilizing both of these approaches in parallel can 
assist in creating meaningful, sustainable, and efective community 
health promotion interventions and feel that in synergy, they en-
courage researchers to think beyond a single study or project period 
and instead develop digital health tools that could be leveraged to 
empower communities beyond research involvement. Informed by 
our fndings, we urge CSCW and HCI researchers to consider not 
only mapping a community’s physical or intellectual assets (e.g.,CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA O’Leary, et al. 
Table 4: Frameworks that Drive Community Health Informatics 
Framework Stages Defnition 
Level I Community is used as an entry-point for recruitment purposes only. 
Level II Community members are involved in the co-development and adaptation of intervention content. CBO 
Level III Community members are trained to administer the intervention. Involvement 
Level IV Content is culturally-tailored to resonate with community values. 
Gifts of individuals Identify gifts and skills of individuals households and families 
Citizen associations Identify existing community associations (e.g., small groups, wellness programs, volunteer programs) 
ABCD Local Institutions Identify public businesses and private institutions (e.g., hospitals, social service agencies, gyms) 
material resources, knowledge) as ABCD approaches suggest but 
also mapping community dynamics (e.g., the processes by which 
the community leverages assets to create change). We recommend 
mapping dynamics during levels II and III of CBO Involvement. 
The community values and dynamics characterized by our par-
ticipants described the processes by which community members 
currently interact and deliver assets to help their community grow 
and thrive. They describe tensions that exist, such as a desire for so-
cial intimacy while also maintaining privacy or fellowship activities 
that span both ofine and online engagement. They characterized 
values (e.g., caring for others, fellowship) and preferences for how 
community members want to engage with a health intervention 
(e.g., peer support through close friendships, creating new fellow-
ship activities, accessing services in another community). Such 
community dynamics are as important as physical assets in that 
they provide a lens for understanding how a digital health tool can 
indeed support and engage community relationships to drive com-
munity development eforts. It is our hope that studying community 
dynamics intentionally will become part of a Community Health 
Informatics research agenda (i.e., a feld of study focused on de-
signing technology that mobilizes community assets and supports 
community members as active agents in improving community 
health and wellbeing). 
Our work centered on identifying community values and dy-
namics in historically Black protestant churches. These specifc 
community processes of change may not necessarily apply to other 
faith traditions. Instead, our work speaks to the importance of the 
approach of studying community values and dynamics as a key step 
in the design process of faith-based health technologies. In doing 
so, we were better able to understand how and why a multifaceted 
approach to wellbeing was personally salient and meaningful to 
church members in the context of the mHealth app. We encourage 
researchers to use this approach in other faith communities to ex-
plore how other faith traditions’ community values and dynamics 
may manifest similarly or diferently from those identifed in this 
work. 
5.2.1 Realizing the Communication of Care Dynamic in Faith Com-
munities. We designed a technospiritual component, the prayer 
wall, focused on supporting the spiritual practice of community 
prayer support. In our Level IV intervention, the prayer wall in-
tegrates spiritual, social, and physical wellbeing together as well as mediates the spiritual practice of prayer. Through our fndings, 
participants explored how the prayer wall could both enhance or 
challenge the communication of care (section 4.4). Community 
members reported that while the prayer wall was indeed efective 
at identifying and supporting community members in need of spir-
itual support, it created, for some, a sense of urgency to respond to 
posters. This deeply entrenched sense of accountability to others 
within the community could drive a sense of responsibility that 
perhaps is burdensome. 
To alleviate this burden and to ensure that members within the 
community received a response, members suggested that a pastor or 
church leader should monitor the prayer wall to ensure that all mem-
bers receive a timely response. Other digital health projects have 
realized similar tensions. For instance, in their MOVE app project, 
researchers found that community members and community health 
workers had diferent expectations for who would update, and main-
tain content in the MOVE app [51]. Our work demonstrates that 
establishing roles within the application (e.g., church members vs 
church leaders) would not only facilitate logistical management but 
also help realize community values (e.g., “making sure everyone 
is covered”). When designing technospiritual tools for religious 
communities, technologists should study how the introduction of 
such a system may disrupt a core community value. Thus, creating 
mechanisms to facilitate an immediate response to posts that align 
with current community practices should be investigated; however, 
such a solution needs to be designed to not burden church leaders. 
5.3 Design Considerations for Technospiritual 
Prayer Support 
Our fndings show that one of the features that resonated most 
with participants was the prayer wall. Participants expressed great 
interest in a tool that not only mediates asynchronous prayer sup-
port but helps build their church’s prayer community. While HCI 
researchers have explored technospiritual practices, the intersec-
tion of community technologies and prayer support exchange is 
a relatively understudied feld [97]. However, recent eforts in the 
merging of social technology practices and prayer support have 
been made by both the Catholic Church and the social media plat-
form Facebook.Community Dynamics in Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons Learned from a Church-based mHealth Pilot CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
In July 2021, Facebook formally announced its eforts “cultivat-
ing partnerships with a wide range of faith communities from indi-
vidual congregations to large denominations” [24]. The Catholic 
Church has created their own web-based online prayer network 
called the “Pope’s Worldwide Prayer Network” [77] fully equipped 
with a community forum where anyone with access to an internet 
browser can publicly post a prayer concern. In addition, the Vatican 
now sells an eRosary. An eRosary is wearable technology based 
on a tangible religious object called a Rosary used for prayer. The 
eRosary was developed in part to help beginners learn to pray the 
Rosary. The eRosary is part of the Vatican’s “Click to Pray” initia-
tive that uses a smartphone app to deliver regular prayer content 
(e.g., monthly prayer intentions set by the Pope) and track your 
prayers [77]. 
Through our work and the work of other researchers and de-
velopers, we fnd that technospiritual interventions that support 
prayer can be multimodal. For instance, Church Connect’s prayer 
wall is text-based whereas the Vatican’s e-rosary and “Click to Pray” 
initiative includes wearable and sensing technologies. Kauer et al.’s 
SoulGarden is a personal prayer network visualization tool that in-
corporates ambient visualizations featuring music and contextually-
based animations [52]. More work should consider diferent media 
formats and their afordances and challenges when supporting 
prayer support and exchange. 
As our fndings on the intersection of community dynamics 
and prayer support demonstrate, designing technospiritual commu-
nity technologies is a complex endeavor. Designers must carefully 
consider how their prayer support platform aligns with the expec-
tations of their religious audiences and honors the spiritual practice 
of prayer. We ofer the following recommendations for developers 
to consider. 
Allow for Flexible Prayer Group Confgurations. Prayer practices 
are often done in various social groupings. For instance, individuals 
may pray on their own, with a prayer partner, with their families, 
in small groups, and/or with the broader church community. Each 
combination (praying alone or with others) is valuable and may 
be infuenced by personal preferences or prayer needs, therefore 
platforms that hope to provide prayer support should allow for 
fexible prayer group confgurations. Our participants shared inter-
esting perspectives on how they would like to scope the audience 
of the prayer wall. One such perspective was to share a prayer 
with a group of people who really know the poster. A similar desire 
to control who can participate in an individual’s prayer support 
network was highlighted in Kauer et al’s SoulGarden [52]. In their 
work, participants requested an approach to exclude unwanted 
prayer supporters through the implementation of an approval pro-
cess. It is possible that in part, users of Church Connect believed 
that scoping their audience was a mechanism for asserting con-
trol over not only who could view their prayer post, but also as a 
way to limit unwanted replies to their prayer posts. Our fndings 
did not fully unearth what drives these preferences nor did they 
characterize how changing the audience of one’s prayer request 
impacts how the poster perceives the prayers said on their behalf. 
Thus, more research into how fexible social confgurations impacts 
computer-mediated prayer support is needed. 
Reconsider “Likes” on Prayer Posts. In our formative work, par-
ticipants expressed trepidation with having a public user facing interaction counter feature that displays how many people have 
endorsed a post, e.g., a ‘like’ button with a numeric counter. There-
fore, we chose not to implement such a feature to avoid any nega-
tive connotations around posts, such as whose prayer received the 
most likes, etc. Instead users passively acknowledge posted prayers 
by pressing the ‘add to prayer list button’ sending an automated 
message to the poster. In our work, church members reported com-
paring posts based on the number of replies. It’s fair to consider 
that similar issues may result had we implemented a ‘like’ button 
with a counter. Interestingly, the Vatican community prayer wall 
does incorporate this feature; however, more research is needed to 
explore the efect of this type of quantifcation on the spiritually 
connective experience, community ties, and mental health. 
Promote Posts That Have Little Engagement. Users of the Church 
Connect App discussed concerns regarding posted prayers that re-
ceived no replies. We must acknowledge that if we design computer-
mediated prayer exchange tools as sequential group posts on con-
temporary social media platforms there’s potential that any one 
post may not be seen. This is a likely outcome if the user base is 
too small and/or if there’s a large volume of prayer requests be-
ing posted. In SoulGarden, fowers that represented unique prayer 
supporters would fade if the prayer supporter had not logged in 
or used the tool for a period of time [52]. Participants explained 
that in practice, the faded fowers may make the prayer givers feel 
guilty for not logging in. In addition, fading fowers could result 
in prayer receivers feeling lonely or isolated [52]. Our participants 
characterized similar tensions between prayer replier response bur-
den and prayer poster response expectations. Thus, investigating 
opportunities for alleviating these concerns and ensuring that all 
posts receive a timely response is an important technospiritual re-
search endeavor. For instance, when posting a prayer concern what 
expectations for a response do posters have? And how does the 
fulfllment or nonfulfllment of that expectation impact the poster 
and their spiritual experience? These issues are of fundamental 
importance when studying the intersection of social computing 
and faith. 
Formally Investigate the Impact of Private v. Public Responses. We 
did not implement an option to privately reply to a prayer wall post. 
Given that a desire to build close personal connections was a value 
identifed in this work, we can imagine that there are potential 
socio-emotional benefts to allowing private prayer responses. For 
instance, a private response feature could make the self-disclosure 
of personal information that may be relevant to the prayer poster 
more likely. Thus, we encourage empirical work investigating the 
advantages and disadvantages of both public and private replies in 
the context of these prayer forums. 
5.4 Exploring Whole-person Orientations to 
Digital Health Using Spiritual Dimensions 
Whole-person models of care were developed in response to conven-
tional reductionist biomedical frameworks of disease that address 
specifc diseases and chronic conditions but ultimately ignore im-
portant dimensions [ 32, 49]. A whole person approach considers 
the entire person including but not limited to their physical health, 
environmental context, individual behavior and lifestyle, culture, 
social connections, mental and spiritual dimensions [49]. ResearchCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA O’Leary, et al. 
in public health, addiction medicine, and general practice demon-
strate numerous positive efects of whole-person approaches on 
patient outcomes including but not limited to improvements in 
quality of life, work productivity, positive health behavior changes, 
and increased involvement in healthcare decisions [49]. Accord-
ingly, we aimed to take a broad view of what health might mean for 
church communities and incorporated elements that bring our work 
in line with the aim of attaining a less reductionist perspective. 
While we acknowledge that there is considerable digital health 
work that addresses both physical and social health, our work em-
phasizes the beneft of incorporating spirituality. In the design of 
Church Connect, we viewed health and wellness from a commu-
nal religious stance based on recommendations of related work, 
which states that designing health applications for faith-based or-
ganizations requires not only an understanding of how faith and 
spirituality impact wellbeing, but also recognizing that for many, 
spiritual and physical wellbeing are intertwined concepts [81, 100]. 
Our participants expressed enthusiasm for the spiritual and com-
munity components included in the Church Connect app stating 
that features such as the prayer wall provided them with a mech-
anism to care for others and receive support from members with 
whom they share mutual bonds. Future work should explore how 
to design tools that provide this kind of multifaceted support in 
context and explore diferent ways in which tools could realize this 
mission. We’ve presented one case study for how we incorporated a 
spiritual and communal approach into the Church Connect health 
intervention, most notably through the prayer wall, however, there 
are certainly other possibilities for integrating spiritual dimensions 
into a health intervention. For instance, adapting spiritual content 
or language based on an individual’s familiarity with scripture or 
automatically ofering enhanced spiritual support in response to 
a health crisis or new health diagnoses. We encourage continued 
work of this type. 
6 LIMITATIONS 
This four-week pilot study was conducted using a small purposive 
sample of church members from two church communities. While 
most of the participants from each church knew one another, future 
work should consider how a larger full scale deployment with hun-
dreds of church members from multiple communities may change 
participant expectations and attitudes towards existing prayer sup-
port features. Though we specifcally asked participants to consider 
how their expectations, concerns, and desires for this tool would 
shift if their entire church community were using the app, we can-
not ignore that imagined realities may or may not adequately refect 
all of the complexities or nuances that arise during full scale deploy-
ments. For instance, our participants discussed how scoping the 
audience of their prayer support posts from church-wide to small 
groups would be highly desirable. Another church member who 
used this app with other ministry members expressed disappoint-
ment when a specifc member did not respond to his post. We do 
not know how church members’ desires for scoping their audience 
or disappointment at waiting for a particular church member’s 
response might change if more members are actively posting and 
responding on the prayer wall. In practice, nuances such as these 
may or may not change in a full scale app deployment. 7 CONCLUSION 
Through this empirical work, we investigated how community 
values and dynamics can promote health and wellbeing in two 
predominantly Black church communities. Our fndings highlight 
how a digital health app can support a community in realizing com-
munity values and ofer opportunities for how such digital health 
tools can build on community dynamics to provide multifaceted 
health-enhancing interventions. We provide recommendations for 
examining communities with a focus on how community interac-
tions mobilize social capital. To date, we are developing our second 
iteration of the Church Connect app based on this work with future 
plans for an evaluation of health outcomes. Our work contributes 
to research in faith-based health interventions and Community 
Health Informatics and encourages future researchers to intention-
ally study how community values drive processes of change when 
designing digital health applications. 
8 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science 
Foundation under Grant No.1831755. Any opinions, fndings, and 
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are 
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily refect the views of 
the National Science Foundation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Phil Adams, Eric PS Baumer, and Geri Gay. 2014. Staccato Social Support 
in Mobile Health Applications. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Toronto, Ontario, Canada) (CHI ’14). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 653–662. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557297 
[2] Asam Almohamed and Dhaval Vyas. 2019. Rebuilding Social Capital in Refugees 
and Asylum Seekers. ACM Transactions on Computer Human Interaction 26, 6, 
Article 41 (Nov 2019), 30 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3364996 
[3] Asam Almohamed, Dhaval Vyas, and Jinglan Zhang. 2017. Rebuilding Social 
Capital: Engaging Newly Arrived Refugees in Participatory Design. In Proceed-
ings of the 29th Australian Conference on Computer-Human Interaction (Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia) (OZCHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 59–67. https://doi.org/10.1145/3152771.3152778 
[4] Kelly A Aschbrenner, John A Naslund, Amy A Gorin, Kim T Mueser, Emily A 
Scherer, Mark Viron, Allison Kinney, and Stephen J Bartels. 2018. Peer support 
and mobile health technology targeting obesity-related cardiovascular risk in 
young adults with serious mental illness: Protocol for a randomized controlled 
trial. Contemporary clinical trials 74 (2018), 97–106. 
[5] Sulin Ba and Lei Wang. 2013. Digital health communities: The efect of their 
motivation mechanisms. Decision Support Systems 55, 4 (2013), 941–947. https: 
//doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2013.01.003 1. Social Media Research and Applications 2. 
Theory and Applications of Social Networks. 
[6] Elizabeth Bales and William Griswold. 2011. Interpersonal Informatics: Making 
Social Infuence Visible. In CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CHI EA ’11). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2227–2232. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/1979742.1979924 
[7] Genevieve Bell. 2006. No More SMS from Jesus: Ubicomp, Religion and Techno-
spiritual Practices. In UbiComp 2006: Ubiquitous Computing, Pal Dourish and 
Adrian Friday (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 141–158. 
[8] Lisa F Berkman, Thomas Glass, et al. 2000. Social integration, social networks, 
social support, and health. Social epidemiology 1, 6 (2000), 137–173. 
[9] Shlomo Berkovsky, Jill Freyne, and Mac Coombe. 2012. Physical activity mo-
tivating games: be active and get your own reward. ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 19, 4 (2012), 1–41. 
[10] Timothy Bickmore, Daniel Schulman, and George Shaw. 2009. DTask and 
LiteBody: Open Source, Standards-Based Tools for Building Web-Deployed 
Embodied Conversational Agents. In Intelligent Virtual Agents, Zsófa Ruttkay, 
Michael Kipp, Anton Nijholt, and Hannes Högni Vilhjálmsson (Eds.). Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 425–431. 
[11] Glenn A. Bowen. 2006. Grounded Theory and Sensitizing Concepts. International 
Journal of Qualitative Methods 5, 3 (2006), 12–23. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
160940690600500304 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/160940690600500304Community Dynamics in Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons Learned from a Church-based mHealth Pilot CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
[12] Ronald L Braithwaite, Sandra E Taylor, and Henrie M Treadwell. 2009. Health 
issues in the Black community. John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY. 
[13] LaPrincess C Brewer, Sarah Jenkins, Kandace Lackore, Jacqueline Johnson, 
Clarence Jones, Lisa A Cooper, Carmen Radecki Breitkopf, Sharonne N Hayes, 
and Christi Patten. 2018. mHealth intervention promoting cardiovascular health 
among African-Americans: recruitment and baseline characteristics of a pilot 
study. JMIR Research Protocols 7, 1 (2018), e31. https://doi.org/10.2196/resprot. 
8842 
[14] LaPrincess C Brewer, Ashok Kumbamu, Christina Smith, Sarah Jenkins, Clarence 
Jones, Sharonne N Hayes, Lora Burke, Lisa A Cooper, and Christi A Patten. 
2020. A cardiovascular health and wellness mobile health intervention among 
church-going African Americans: Formative evaluation of the FAITH! app. JMIR 
Formative Research 4, 11 (2020), e21450. https://doi.org/10.2196/21450 
[15] Marci Kramish Campbell, Marlyn Allicock Hudson, Ken Resnicow, Natasha Blak-
eney, Amy Paxton, and Monica Baskin. 2007. Church-Based Health Promotion 
Interventions: Evidence and Lessons Learned. Annual Review of Public Health 28, 
1 (2007), 213–234. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.publhealth.28.021406.144016 
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.publhealth.28.021406.144016 PMID: 
17155879. 
[16] Justine Cassell. 2001. Embodied Conversational Agents: Representation and 
Intelligence in User Interfaces. AI Magazine 22, 4 (Dec. 2001), 67–83. https: 
//doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v22i4.1593 
[17] Justine Cassell, Hannes Högni Vilhjálmsson, and Timothy Bickmore. 2004. BEAT: 
the Behavior Expression Animation Toolkit. In Life-Like Characters: Tools, 
Afective Functions, and Applications, Helmut Prendinger and Mitsuru Ishizuka 
(Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 163–185. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-662-08373-4_8 
[18] Pew Research Center. 2021. Mobile Fact Sheet: Who owns cell-
phones and smartphones. https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/fact-
sheet/mobile/?menuItem=d40cde3f-c455-4f0e-9be0-0aefcdaeee00#who-owns-
cellphones-and-smartphones 
[19] Yiong Huak Chan. 2019. Evaluation of a technology-based peer-support in-
tervention program for preventing postnatal depression (part 1): randomized 
controlled trial. J Med Internet Res 21, 8 (2019), e12410. 
[20] Huan Chen, Yanling Chai, Le Dong, Wenyi Niu, and Puhong Zhang. 2018. 
Efectiveness and appropriateness of mHealth interventions for maternal and 
child health: systematic review. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 6, 1 (2018), e7. 
[21] Alexander Cho, Roxana G. Herrera, Luis Chaidez, and Adilene Uriostegui. 2019. 
The “Comadre” Project: An Asset-Based Design Approach to Connecting Low-
Income Latinx Families to Out-of-School Learning Opportunities. Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3290605.3300837 
[22] Elena Cyrus, Rachel Clarke, Dexter Hadley, Zoran Bursac, Mary Jo Trepka, 
Jessy G Dévieux, Ulas Bagci, Debra Furr-Holden, Makella Coudray, Yandra 
Mariano, et al. 2020. The impact of COVID-19 on African American communities 
in the United States. Health Equity 4, 1 (2020), 476–483. 
[23] Kathryn Pitkin Derose, Sarah A. Fox, Elena Reigadas, and Jennifer Hawes-
Dawson. 2000. Church-Based Telephone Mammography Counseling with Peer 
Counselors. Journal of Health Communication 5, 2 (2000), 175–188. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/108107300406884 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/108107300406884 
PMID: 11010348. 
[24] Elizabeth Dias. 2021. Facebook’s Next Target: The Religious Experience. https: 
//www.nytimes.com/2021/07/25/us/facebook-church.html 
[25] Jessa Dickinson, Jalon Arthur, Maddie Shiparski, Angalia Bianca, Alejandra 
Gonzalez, and Sheena Erete. 2021. Amplifying Community-led Violence Pre-
vention as a Counter to Structural Oppression. Proceedings of the ACM on 
Human-Computer Interaction 5, CSCW1 (2021), 1–28. 
[26] Jessa Dickinson, Mark Díaz, Christopher A. Le Dantec, and Sheena Erete. 2019. 
“The Cavalry Ain’t Coming in to Save Us”: Supporting Capacities and Relation-
ships through Civic Tech. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 3, CSCW, Article 
123 (Nov 2019), 21 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359225 
[27] Tawanna R. Dillahunt. 2014. Fostering Social Capital in Economically Dis-
tressed Communities. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (Toronto, Ontario, Canada) (CHI ’14). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 531–540. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
2556288.2557123 
[28] Lynn Dombrowski, Ellie Harmon, and Sarah Fox. 2016. Social Justice-Oriented 
Interaction Design: Outlining Key Design Strategies and Commitments. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (Brisbane, 
QLD, Australia) (DIS ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, 656–671. https://doi.org/10.1145/2901790.2901861 
[29] Nicole B. Ellison, Charles Steinfeld, and Clif Lampe. 2007. The Ben-
efts of Facebook “Friends”: Social Capital and College Students’ Use 
of Online Social Network Sites. Journal of Computer-Mediated Com-
munication 12, 4 (2007), 1143–1168. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-
6101.2007.00367.x arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1083-
6101.2007.00367.x [30] Sheena L Erete. 2014. Community, group and individual: A framework for 
designing community technologies. The Journal of Community Informatics 10, 1 
(2014), 13 pages. 
[31] Malin Eriksson. 2011. Social capital and health – implications for health promo-
tion. Global Health Action 4, 1 (2011), 5611. https://doi.org/10.3402/gha.v4i0.5611 
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.3402/gha.v4i0.5611 PMID: 21311607. 
[32] Betty R Ferrell, George Handzo, Tina Picchi, Christina Puchalski, and William E 
Rosa. 2020. The urgency of spiritual care: COVID-19 and the critical need for 
whole-person palliation. Journal of pain and symptom management 60, 3 (2020), 
e7–e11. 
[33] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2018. Well-Being Concepts. https: 
//www.cdc.gov/hrqol/wellbeing.htm#three 
[34] Sarah Fox and Christopher Le Dantec. 2014. Community Historians: Scafolding 
Community Engagement through Culture and Heritage. In Proceedings of the 
2014 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (DIS 
’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 785–794. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/2598510.2598563 
[35] Aakash Gautam, Deborah Tatar, and Steve Harrison. 2020. Crafting, Commu-
nality, and Computing: Building on Existing Strengths To Support a Vulnerable 
Population. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376647 
[36] Daniel Gooch, Blaine A. Price, Anna Klis-Davies, and Julie Webb. 2021. A Design 
Exploration of Health-Related Community Displays. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. 
Interact. 5, CSCW1, Article 85 (Apr 2021), 22 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3449159 
[37] Joseph G Grzywacz and Juliana Fuqua. 2000. The social ecology of health: 
Leverage points and linkages. Behavioral medicine 26, 3 (2000), 101–115. 
[38] Michael Gurstein. 2007. What is community informatics (and why does it matter)?
Vol. 2. Polimetrica, Monza, Italy. 
[39] Myeunghee Han and Eunjoo Lee. 2018. Efectiveness of Mobile Health Ap-
plication Use to Improve Health Behavior Changes: A Systematic Review of 
Randomized Controlled Trials. Healthcare Informatics Research 24, 3 (2018), 
207–226. https://doi.org/10.4258/hir.2018.24.3.207 
[40] Laura C. Hanson, Tonya D. Armstrong, Melissa A. Green, Michelle Hayes, Stacie 
Peacock, Sharon Elliot-Bynum, Moses V. Goldmon, Giselle Corbie-Smith, and 
Jo Anne Earp. 2013. Circles of Care: Development and Initial Evaluation of a Peer 
Support Model for African Americans With Advanced Cancer. Health Education 
& Behavior 40, 5 (2013), 536–543. https://doi.org/10.1177/1090198112461252 
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/1090198112461252 PMID: 23077156. 
[41] Christina Harrington, Sheena Erete, and Anne Marie Piper. 2019. Deconstructing 
community-based collaborative design: Towards more equitable participatory 
design engagements. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, 
CSCW (2019), 1–25. 
[42] Danetta Hendricks Sloan, Theodora Peters, Kimberly S. Johnson, Janice V. 
Bowie, Yang Ting, and Rebecca Aslakson. 2016. Church-Based Health 
Promotion Focused on Advance Care Planning and End-of-Life Care at 
Black Baptist Churches: A Cross-Sectional Survey. Journal of Pallia-
tive Medicine 19, 2 (2016), 190–194. https://doi.org/10.1089/jpm.2015.0319 
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1089/jpm.2015.0319 PMID: 26840855. 
[43] Evan Hill, Ainara Tiefenthäler, Christiaan Triebert, Drew Jordan, Haley Willis, 
and Robin Stein. 2020. How George Floyd Was Killed In Police Custody. https: 
//www.nytimes.com/2020/05/31/us/george-foyd-investigation.html 
[44] The White House. 2021. FACT SHEET: President Biden Reestab-
lishes the White House Ofce of Faith-Based and Neighborhood Part-
nerships. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefng-room/statements-
releases/2021/02/14/fact-sheet-president-biden-reestablishes-the-white-
house-ofce-of-faith-based-and-neighborhood-partnerships 
[45] Joey Chiao-Yin Hsiao and Tawanna R Dillahunt. 2018. Technology to support 
immigrant access to social capital and adaptation to a new country. Proceedings 
of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–21. 
[46] Evan Imber-Black. 2020. Rituals in the time of COVID-19: imagination, respon-
siveness, and the human spirit. Family process 59, 3 (2020), 912–921. 
[47] Farnaz Irannejad Bisafar, Lina Itzel Martinez, and Andrea G. Parker. 2018. Social 
Computing-Driven Activism in Youth Empowerment Organizations: Challenges 
and Opportunities. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173757 
[48] Farnaz Irannejad Bisafar, Aditya Ponnada, Ameneh Shamekhi, and Andrea G. 
Parker. 2017. A Sociotechnical Study of a Community-Based Rewards Program: 
Insights on Building Social, Financial and Human Capital. Proc. ACM Hum.-
Comput. Interact. 1, CSCW, Article 55 (Dec 2017), 21 pages. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/3134690 
[49] Wayne B. Jonas and Elena Rosenbaum. 2021. The Case for Whole-Person Integra-
tive Care. Medicina 57, 7 (2021), 12. https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina57070677 
[50] Ayana Jordan, Theresa Babuscio, Charla Nich, and Kathleen M. Carroll. 2021. A 
feasibility study providing substance use treatment in the Black church. Journal 
of Substance Abuse Treatment 124 (2021), 108218. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat. 
2020.108218CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA O’Leary, et al. 
[51] Anne Marie Kanstrup and Pernille Bertelsen. 2019. Design for Healthy Hori-
zons in a Local Community: Digital Relations in a Neighbourhood with Health 
Challenges. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Communi-
ties & Technologies - Transforming Communities (Vienna, Austria) (C&T ’19). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 41–50. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3328320.3328370 
[52] Avleen Kaur, C. Estelle Smith, and Loren Terveen. 2021. Sway Together, Stay 
Together: Visualizing Spiritual Support Networks Through the SoulGarden Pro-
totype. In Companion Publication of the 2021 Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work and Social Computing. Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 84–88. https://doi.org/10.1145/3462204.3481774 
[53] Elizabeth Kaziunas, Michael S. Klinkman, and Mark S. Ackerman. 2019. Precar-
ious Interventions: Designing for Ecologies of Care. Proceedings of the ACM 
on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW, Article 113 (Nov 2019), 27 pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3359215 
[54] John P Kretzmann and John McKnight. 1993. Building communities from the 
inside out: a path toward fnding and mobilizing a community’s assets. Center 
for Urban Afairs and Policy Research, Neighborhood Innovations, Chicago, IL, 
USA. 
[55] Ariana Y. Lahijani, Adrian R. King, Mary M. Gullatte, Monique Hennink, and 
Robert A. Bednarczyk. 2021. HPV Vaccine Promotion: The church as an agent 
of change. Social Science & Medicine 268 (2021), 113375. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.socscimed.2020.113375 
[56] Kristie J. Lancaster, Antoinette M. Schoenthaler, Sara A. Midberry, Sheldon O. 
Watts, Matthew R. Nulty, Helen V. Cole, Elizabeth Ige, William Chaplin, and 
Gbenga Ogedegbe. 2014. Rationale and design of Faith-based Approaches in the 
Treatment of Hypertension (FAITH), a lifestyle intervention targeting blood 
pressure control among black church members. American Heart Journal 167, 3 
(2014), 301–307. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ahj.2013.10.026 
[57] Thomas M. Lasater, Diane M. Becker, Martha N. Hill, and Kim M. Gans. 1997. 
Synthesis of fndings and issues from religious-based cardiovascular disease 
prevention trials. Annals of Epidemiology 7, 7, Supplement (1997), S46–S53. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1047-2797(97)80007-5 
[58] Daisy Le, Linda Aldoory, Mary A Garza, Craig S Fryer, Robin Sawyer, and 
Cheryl L Holt. 2018. A spiritually-based text messaging program to increase 
cervical cancer awareness among African American women: design and devel-
opment of the CervixCheck pilot study. JMIR Formative Research 2, 1 (2018), e5. 
https://doi.org/10.2196/formative.8112 
[59] Christopher A. Le Dantec and Sarah Fox. 2015. Strangers at the Gate: Gaining 
Access, Building Rapport, and Co-Constructing Community-Based Research. 
In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work & Social Computing (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CSCW ’15). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1348–1358. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/2675133.2675147 
[60] Mikyung Lee, Hyeonkyeong Lee, Youlim Kim, Junghee Kim, Mikyeong Cho, 
Jaeun Jang, and Hyoeun Jang. 2018. Mobile app-based health promotion pro-
grams: a systematic review of the literature. International journal of environ-
mental research and public health 15, 12 (2018), 2838. 
[61] Victor R. Lee, Joel R. Drake, Ryan Cain, and Jefrey Thayne. 2015. Opportunistic 
Uses of the Traditional School Day through Student Examination of Fitbit 
Activity Tracker Data. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on 
Interaction Design and Children (Boston, Massachusetts) (IDC ’15). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 209–218. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/2771839.2771861 
[62] R. Craig Lefebvre and Alexandra S. Bornkessel. 2013. Digital 
Social Networks and Health. Circulation 127, 17 (2013), 1829– 
1836. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.000897 
arXiv:https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.000897 
[63] Calvin A Liang, Sean A Munson, and Julie A Kientz. 2021. Embracing Four 
Tensions in Human-Computer Interaction Research with Marginalized People. 
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 28, 2 (2021), 1–47. 
[64] Henry Louis Gates Jr. 2021. To Understand America, You Need to Understand the 
Black Church. https://time.com/5939921/henry-lous-gates-american-history-
black-church/ 
[65] Andrew Macvean and Judy Robertson. 2013. Understanding Exergame Users’ 
Physical Activity, Motivation and Behavior over Time. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Paris, France) (CHI 
’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1251–1260. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466163 
[66] Khalid Majrashi. 2018. User need and experience of Hajj mobile and ubiqui-
tous systems: Designing for the largest religious annual gathering. Cogent 
Engineering 5, 1 (2018), 1480303. 
[67] Alison Mathie and Gord Cunningham. 2003. From clients to citizens: Asset-
based community development as a strategy for community-driven development. 
Development in practice 13, 5 (2003), 474–486. 
[68] Wylie McNabb, Michael Quinn, Jean Kerver, Sandy Cook, and Theodore 
Karrison. 1997. The PATHWAYS Church-Based Weight Loss Program 
for Urban African-American Women at Risk for Diabetes. Diabetes Care 20, 10 (1997), 1518–1523. https://doi.org/10.2337/diacare.20.10.1518 
arXiv:https://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/20/10/1518.full.pdf 
[69] Marilyn Mellowes. 2021. The Black Church. https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/ 
americanexperience/features/godinamerica-black-church 
[70] Andrew D. Miller and Elizabeth D. Mynatt. 2014. StepStream: A School-Based 
Pervasive Social Fitness System for Everyday Adolescent Health. In Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada) (CHI ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 2823–2832. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557190 
[71] William R Miller and Stephen Rollnick. 2012. Motivational interviewing: Helping 
people change. Guilford press, New York, NY. 
[72] Gregorio A Millett, Austin T Jones, David Benkeser, Stefan Baral, Laina Mercer, 
Chris Beyrer, Brian Honermann, Elise Lankiewicz, Leandro Mena, Jefrey S 
Crowley, et al. 2020. Assessing diferential impacts of COVID-19 on black 
communities. Annals of epidemiology 47 (2020), 37–44. 
[73] Besheer Mohamed. 2021. 10 new fndings about faith among Black Ameri-
cans. https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/02/16/10-new-fndings-
about-faith-among-black-americans/ 
[74] Elizabeth L. Murnane, Tara G. Walker, Beck Tench, Stephen Voida, and Jaime 
Snyder. 2018. Personal Informatics in Interpersonal Contexts: Towards the 
Design of Technology That Supports the Social Ecologies of Long-Term Mental 
Health Management. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, 
CSCW, Article 127 (Nov 2018), 27 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3274396 
[75] Larry Murphy. 2000. Down by the riverside: readings in African American Religion. 
Vol. 8. NYU Press, New York, NY, USA. 
[76] Felix Naughton, Sarah Hopewell, Neal Lathia, Rik Schalbroeck, Chloë Brown, 
Cecilia Mascolo, Andy McEwen, and Stephen Sutton. 2016. A context-sensing 
mobile phone app (Q sense) for smoking cessation: a mixed-methods study. 
JMIR mHealth and uHealth 4, 3 (2016), e5787. 
[77] Vatican News. 2019. “Click to Pray eRosary” – wearable smart device to pray 
the rosary for peace. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/vatican-city/news/2019-
10/click-pray-rosary-smart-digital-device-world-peace.html 
[78] Robert L Newton Jr, Leah A Carter, William Johnson, Dachuan Zhang, Sandra 
Larrivee, Betty M Kennedy, Melissa Harris, and Daniel S Hsia. 2018. A church-
based weight loss intervention in African American adults using text messages 
(LEAN Study): cluster randomized controlled trial. Journal of Medical Internet 
Research 20, 8 (2018), e256. https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.9816 
[79] Stefan Olafsson, Dhaval Parmar, Everlyne Kimani, Teresa K. O’Leary, and Tim-
othy Bickmore. 2021. ‘More like a Person than Reading Text in a Machine’: 
Characterizing User Choice of Embodied Agents vs. Conventional GUIs on Smart-
phones. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451664 
[80] Teresa K. O’Leary, Elizabeth Stowell, Jessica A. Hofman, Michael Paasche-Orlow, 
Timothy Bickmore, and Andrea G. Parker. 2021. Examining the Intersections of 
Race, Religion & Community Technologies: A Photovoice Study. In Proceedings 
of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 698, 19 pages. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445418 
[81] Teresa K. O’Leary, Elizabeth Stowell, Everlyne Kimani, Dhaval Parmar, Ste-
fan Olafsson, Jessica Hofman, Andrea G. Parker, Michael K. Paasche-Orlow, 
and Timothy Bickmore. 2020. Community-Based Cultural Tailoring of Vir-
tual Agents. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on In-
telligent Virtual Agents (Virtual Event, Scotland, UK) (IVA ’20). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 43, 8 pages. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3383652.3423875 
[82] World Health Organization. 2022. Constitution of the World Health Organiza-
tion. https://www.who.int/about/governance/constitution 
[83] Wenjing Pan, Cuihua Shen, and Bo Feng. 2017. You Get What You Give: Under-
standing Reply Reciprocity and Social Capital in Online Health Support Forums. 
Journal of Health Communication 22, 1 (2017), 45–52. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10810730.2016.1250845 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/10810730.2016.1250845 
PMID: 28027009. 
[84] Andrea Parker, Vasudhara Kantroo, Hee Rin Lee, Miguel Osornio, Mansi Sharma, 
and Rebecca Grinter. 2012. Health Promotion as Activism: Building Community 
Capacity to Efect Social Change. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 99–108. https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2207692 
[85] Andrea G. Parker, Herman Saksono, Jessica A. Hofman, and Carmen Castaneda-
Sceppa. 2018. A Community Health Orientation for Wellness Technology 
Design & Delivery. In Designing Healthcare That Works, Mark S. Ackerman, 
Sean P. Goggins, Thomas Herrmann, Michael Prilla, and Christian Stary (Eds.). 
Academic Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 59–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
12-812583-0.00004-3 
[86] Lucy Pei and Bonnie Nardi. 2019. We Did It Right, But It Was Still Wrong: 
Toward Assets-Based Design. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI EA ’19). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–11. https://doi. 
org/10.1145/3290607.3310434Community Dynamics in Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons Learned from a Church-based mHealth Pilot CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
[87] Jane Peterson, Jan R. Atwood, and Bernice Yates. 2002. Key Elements for 
Church-Based Health Promotion Programs: Outcome-Based Literature Review. 
Public Health Nursing 19, 6 (2002), 401–411. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1525-
1446.2002.19602.x arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1046/j.1525-
1446.2002.19602.x 
[88] Thanh-Mai Phan and Svetlana Yarosh. 2016. Sustaining Reciprocity: Generating 
Social Capital within Peer-Support Communities. In Proceedings of the 19th 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing 
Companion (San Francisco, California, USA) (CSCW ’16 Companion). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 369–372. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/2818052.2869115 
[89] Erika Shehan Poole, Andrew D. Miller, Yan Xu, Elsa Eiriksdottir, Richard Catram-
bone, and Elizabeth D. Mynatt. 2011. The Place for Ubiquitous Computing in 
Schools: Lessons Learned from a School-Based Intervention for Youth Physical 
Activity. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Ubiquitous Com-
puting (Beijing, China) (UbiComp ’11). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 395–404. https://doi.org/10.1145/2030112.2030165 
[90] Ken Resnicow, Debbie Coleman Wallace, Alice Jackson, Ann Digirolamo, Erica 
Odom, Terry Wang, William N. Dudley, Marsha Davis, Diane Mitchell, and 
Tom Baranowski. 2000. Dietary change through African American churches: 
Baseline results and program description of the eat for life trial. Journal of Cancer 
Education 15, 3 (2000), 156–163. https://doi.org/10.1080/08858190009528685 
arXiv:https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/08858190009528685 PMID: 
11019764. 
[91] Yasmyne Ronquillo, Arlen Meyers, and Scott J. Korvek. 2021. Digital Health. Stat-
Pearls Publishing, Treasure Island (FL), Treasure Island, FL. http://europepmc. 
org/books/NBK470260 
[92] Herman Saksono, Carmen Castaneda-Sceppa, Jessica Hofman, Vivien Morris, 
Magy Seif El-Nasr, and Andrea G. Parker. 2020. Storywell: Designing for Family 
Fitness App Motivation by Using Social Rewards and Refection. In Proceedings 
of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3313831.3376686 
[93] Herman Saksono, Carmen Castaneda-Sceppa, Jessica Hofman, Magy Seif El-
Nasr, Vivien Morris, and Andrea G. Parker. 2018. Family Health Promotion in 
Low-SES Neighborhoods: A Two-Month Study of Wearable Activity Tracking. 
In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173883 
[94] Carmen D. Samuel-Hodge, Thomas C. Keyserling, Sola Park, Larry F. Johnston, 
Ziya Gizlice, and Shrikant I. Bangdiwala. 2009. A Randomized Trial of a Church-
Based Diabetes Self-management Program for African Americans With Type 
2 Diabetes. The Diabetes Educator 35, 3 (2009), 439–454. https://doi.org/10. 
1177/0145721709333270 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/0145721709333270 PMID: 
19383882. 
[95] Ari Schlesinger, W. Keith Edwards, and Rebecca E. Grinter. 2017. Intersectional 
HCI: Engaging Identity through Gender, Race, and Class. In Proceedings of the 
2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado, 
USA) (CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
5412–5427. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025766 
[96] John B. Schorling, Julienne Roach, Marjorie Siegel, Natalie Baturka, Dawn E. 
Hunt, Thomas M. Guterbock, and Herbert L. Stewart. 1997. A Trial of Church-
Based Smoking Cessation Interventions for Rural African Americans. Preventive 
Medicine 26, 1 (1997), 92–101. https://doi.org/10.1006/pmed.1996.9988 
[97] C Estelle Smith, Avleen Kaur, Katie Z Gach, Loren Terveen, Mary Jo Kreitzer, and 
Susan O’Conner-Von. 2021. What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact 
the Design of Online Communities? Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer 
Interaction 5, CSCW1 (2021), 1–42. 
[98] C Estelle Smith, Zachary Levonian, Haiwei Ma, Robert Giaquinto, Gemma Lein-
Mcdonough, Zixuan Li, Susan O’Conner-Von, and Svetlana Yarosh. 2020. " I 
Cannot Do All of This Alone" Exploring Instrumental and Prayer Support in 
Online Health Communities. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 
(TOCHI) 27, 5 (2020), 1–41. 
[99] Elizabeth Stowell, Mercedes C. Lyson, Herman Saksono, Reneé C. Wurth, Holly 
Jimison, Misha Pavel, and Andrea G. Parker. 2018. Designing and Evaluating 
MHealth Interventions for Vulnerable Populations: A Systematic Review. In 
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–17. https://doi. org/10.1145/3173574.3173589 
[100] Elizabeth Stowell, Teresa K. O’Leary, Everlyne Kimani, Michael K. Paasche-
Orlow, Timothy Bickmore, and Andrea G. Parker. 2020. Investigating Opportu-
nities for Crowdsourcing in Church-Based Health Interventions: A Participatory 
Design Study. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376833 
[101] Anselm Strauss and Juliet Corbin. 2014. Basics of Qualitative Research: Tech-
niques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory. Sage Publications, Inc., 
Thousand Oaks, CA, USA. 
[102] Robert Joseph Taylor, Linda M Chatters, and Jef Levin. 2003. Religion in the 
lives of African Americans: Social, psychological, and health perspectives. Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks. 
[103] Unity Technologies. 2022. Unity Real-Time Development Platform. https: 
//unity.com/ 
[104] Hayley Thomas, Geofrey Mitchell, Justin Rich, and Megan Best. 2018. Defnition 
of whole person care in general practice in the English language literature: a 
systematic review. BMJ open 8, 12 (2018), e023758. 
[105] Andreas Triantafyllidis, Haridimos Kondylakis, Konstantinos Votis, Dimitrios 
Tzovaras, Nicos Maglaveras, and Kazem Rahimi. 2019. Features, outcomes, 
and challenges in mobile health interventions for patients living with chronic 
diseases: A review of systematic reviews. International Journal of Medical 
Informatics 132 (2019), 103984. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.103984 
[106] Kim M Unertl, Chris L Schaefbauer, Terrance R Campbell, Charles Senteio, 
Katie A Siek, Suzanne Bakken, and Tifany C Veinot. 2016. Integrating 
community-based participatory research and informatics approaches to im-
prove the engagement and health of underserved populations. Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association 23, 1 (2016), 60–73. 
[107] Amy Voida, Ellie Harmon, and Ban Al-Ani. 2011. Homebrew Databases: Com-
plexities of Everyday Information Management in Nonproft Organizations. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 915–924. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979078 
[108] Amy Voida, Ellie Harmon, and Ban Al-Ani. 2012. Bridging between Organiza-
tions and the Public: Volunteer Coordinators’ Uneasy Relationship with Social 
Computing. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
1967–1976. https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208341 
[109] Fabian Wahle, Tobias Kowatsch, Elgar Fleisch, Michael Rufer, and Stef Weidt. 
2016. Mobile sensing and support for people with depression: a pilot trial in the 
wild. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 4, 3 (2016), e5960. 
[110] Sara Wilcox, Marilyn Laken, Thaje Anderson, Melissa Bopp, Deborah Bryant, 
Rickey Carter, Octavia Gethers, Jeannette Jordan, Lottie McClorin, Kathleen 
O’Rourke, Allen W. Parrott, Rosetta Swinton, and Antronette Yancey. 2007. 
The Health-e-AME Faith-Based Physical Activity Initiative: Description and 
Baseline Findings. Health Promotion Practice 8, 1 (2007), 69–78. https://doi. 
org/10.1177/1524839905278902 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/1524839905278902 
PMID: 16885511. 
[111] Marisol Wong-Villacres, Aakash Gautam, Deborah Tatar, and Betsy DiSalvo. 
2021. Refections on Assets-Based Design: A Journey Towards A Collective of 
Assets-Based Thinkers. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 
5, CSCW2 (2021), 1–32. 
[112] Susan P. Wyche, Paul M. Aoki, and Rebecca E. Grinter. 2008. Re-Placing Faith: 
Reconsidering the Secular-Religious Use Divide in the United States and Kenya. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Florence, Italy) (CHI ’08). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 11–20. https://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357057 
[113] Susan P. Wyche, Kelly E. Caine, Benjamin Davison, Micheal Arteaga, and Re-
becca E. Grinter. 2008. Sun Dial: Exploring Techno-Spiritual Design through 
a Mobile Islamic Call to Prayer Application. In CHI ’08 Extended Abstracts 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Florence, Italy) (CHI EA ’08). Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3411–3416. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/1358628.1358866 
[114] Susan P. Wyche, Gillian R. Hayes, Lonnie D. Harvel, and Rebecca E. Grinter. 
2006. Technology in Spiritual Formation: An Exploratory Study of Computer 
Mediated Religious Communications. In Proceedings of the 2006 20th Anniversary 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (Banf, Alberta, Canada) 
(CSCW ’06). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 199–208. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1180875.1180908