Enhancing Mathematics Information Retrieval
Martin Líška
Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University, Botanická 68a, 602 00 Brno, Czech Republic
255768@mail.muni.cz
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [ Information Systems ]: Information storage and Retrieval—
Information Search and Retrieval ; I.7 [ Computing Methodolo-
gies]: Document and text Processing—Index Generation
Keywords
query expansion, digital mathematical libraries, indexing mathemat-
ics, MIaS, MathML, formula, subformula uniﬁcation, evaluation
Motivation
Mathematics Information Retrieval (MIR) is a domain speciﬁc
branch of Information Retrieval. MIR is a broad term for all the
activities related to obtaining information from a collection of re-
sources and answering an information need that involves mathe-
matics in the form of math expressions and formulae. MIR is very
important for Digital Mathematics Libraries (DMLs) which gather
mathematically oriented documents in which users need to search
and navigate eectively. A concrete implementation usually means
a search engine that is able to answer a query composed of mathe-
matical expressions as well as standard textual keywords searching
through a collection with a substantial amount of mathematics.
There are several research groups that aim at creating well per-
forming and usable math search engine. Our group located at the
Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University, develops Math Indexer
and Searcher (MIaS) [2] – a math-aware search engine, currently
deployed in EuDML (European Digital Mathematics Library). To
the best of my knowledge, it is the only deployment of a MIR system
in such a scale. Other deployments, e.g. DML-CZ, are planned.
The Goal
The goal is to design the ultimate math information retrieval system.
The ultimateness can be understood as a combination of speciﬁc
features that all together will support high precision as well as recall
in searching documents with mathematical content.
Research Topics and Methods
The main research aspects of MIR are the following: preprocess-
ing– unifying the input math notation; indexing – preparation of the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author(s). Copyright is held by the
owner/author(s).
SIGIR’15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767843.internal structures and representation for similarity search; search-
ing– interpretation of user query and expansion; evaluation – con-
tinuous evaluation of retrieval quality; performance – the internal
representations must support a good overall performance.
Based on the NTCIR-11 Math-2 Task evaluation, MIaS approach
is currently one of the best ranked in terms of the system’s eective-
ness [1]. In my work, I want to build upon the current performance
of MIaS and research further methods and topics that could possibly
make the system perform even better. The topics are the following:
Semantically Enhanced Search – integration of Computer alge-
bra systems in the indexing as well as the searching phase
as a computational power to reduce math expressions to a
normalized form. Disambiguation of math structures from
document and queries into known concepts in order to intro-
duce semantics into the matching.
Subformula Uniﬁcation – the ability to unify whole expression
subtrees in order to allow the users to create queries contain-
ing wildcards in math expressions. In more complex query
expressions wildcards can be critical in suppressing unin-
teresting parts of math expressions. The complexity of this
aspect is heavily dependent on the representation of the data.
Query Expansion/Relaxation – mathematical queries can be re-
laxed by dividing it to smaller parts. This is can be a fallback
method in case of unsuccessful complex query expressions.
On the keyword level, mixed mathematical-textual queries
can be relaxed by removing keywords from the individual
parts of the query.
Combined Text-Mathematical Search – math expressions and
text keywords need to be eectively combined for the system
query in terms of logical operators as well as their mutual
weighting.
Evaluation Framework – preparation of an automated evaluation
framework for rigorously evaluating changes proposed to the
retrieval process as listed above. This is possible with the
presence of a test collection for MIR, such as NTCIR-11
Math-2 collection.
References
[1] M. Líška, M. R˚ uži ˇcka, and P. Sojka. Math Indexer and Searcher under
the Hood: History and Development of a Winning Strategy. In
N. Kando, K. Kishida (Eds.), Proceedings of the 11th NTCIR
Conference, pp. 127–134. NII, Tokyo, 2014.
[2]P. Sojka and M. Líška. Indexing and Searching Mathematics in Digital
Libraries – Architecture, Design and Scalability Issues. In J. H.
Davenport et al. (Eds.) Proceedings of CICM 2011, LNAI 6824,
pp. 228–243, Berlin, Germany, 2011. Springer.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-22673-1_16.
1063