The Research Proposal of Racial Inequalities against 
Asian American in College Admission based on 
Regression Model 
Wenjie Xing 
Sichuan University 
Wuhou District, Chengdu 
Sichuan, China 
+86-18611582092 
592626724@qq.com 
 
 Ming Guan 
Columbia University in the City of New York 
2960 Broadway 
New York 
+1-2069157688 
3075671090@qq.com 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
Although the data from different literature materials and other 
related researches presented give us essential evidence of racial 
and ethnical inequalities in admissions to college, it is still not 
enough to prove the assumptions on the basis of empiricism study. 
From this case, in order to strengthen the finding from previous 
researches and make it more precise, this paper presents a research 
proposal of developing a statistical model to access the degree of 
racial preference in college admission. 
CCS Concepts  
Applied computing →Law, so cial and behavioral 
sciences→Economics 
Keywords  
Bamboo Ceiling, racial discrimination, Asian American. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Although the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits racial 
discrimination in education, we cannot rationally deny the fact 
that many undergraduate institutions have limited the admission 
number of Asian American applicants based on ethnical 
preferences. In 2016, several Asian American organizations 
requested the Department of Education to trigger the investigation 
on Brown University, Yale University, and Dartmouth College, 
stating that Asian American students had faced unfair treatments 
during the college admission processes. While the population of 
the Asian American community in college has been doubled 
during the last two decades, and the number of high-qualified 
Asian-American applicants has been drastically increased, the 
acceptance rate of Asian American at Ivy League schools has 
remained at the same level, the percentage around the mid-teens. 
Hence, Asian American community believes that the “Bamboo 
Ceiling” still exists in the elite education system to control the 
number of Asian students being admitted. 
Similar to the usage of “Glass Ceiling ”, the inequalities and 
barriers that aim to eliminate Asian American people from 
executive level positions in the workplace can be described as “Bamboo Ceiling ”. In my opinion, discrimination in institutions 
of higher education specifically targeting on applicants with Asian 
decent is another phenomenon of “Bamboo Ceiling ”. However, 
despite the fact that Asian American have to meet the more 
restricting admission. 
In contrast to the massive research on racial issues among African 
American and Hispanic people, the debate on discrimination 
against the Asian American is not popular in academics unlike 
other minority groups in need of social support, Asian American 
is always considered as the “model minority ” for their high 
education level and respectable income. And Asian American 
family always views education as an essential element in next 
generation’s growth because of their specified culture and 
tradition. In 1966, Professor William Peterson published a very 
influential journal “Success Story, Japanese American Style ” that 
represented the transformation of Asian American from “problem 
minority” to “model minority. ” This label means that they are 
wealthy and well-educated and that they do not experience 
discrimination and prejudice. As a result of this tag, Asian 
American is not considered underrepresented, and are thus 
ineligible for affirmative action protection. In addition to the 
stereotype of Asian American, “receiving an education is of 
paramount importance for the Asian American family ” (Le, p.n). 
“The parenting styles of Asian American parents in 
intergenerational families embodies Confucian values ” (Chao, 56). 
Asian American parents positively appreciate the crucial role of 
education and believe that “education is a strong predictor of 
future success, implying that an improper education leads to 
failure” (Tang, 1240). Due to the lack of the previous study on 
ethnic prejudice against Asian American and the critical role of 
education in Asian American community, it is necessary to 
conduct the research focusing on the ‘model minority ’s racial 
problems in education. 
2. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 
2.1 Bamboo Ceiling 
In contrast to the extensive research exists on glass ceiling, study 
on the term bamboo ceiling and unequal treatments that Asian 
American have been through in society. The study on Asian 
Americans is still regarded as a rural desert, but there are still 
some threads that we could find from previous research. Based o n 
the most recent government statistics, “Asian Americans have the 
lowest chance of rising to management when compared with 
blacks, Hispanics, and women in spite of having the highest 
educational attainment ” (Hyun, p.n). Comparing with the majority 
and other minority groups which are protected under affirmative Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or  commercial advantage and  that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org.  
ICEME 2017,  October 27 –29, 2017, Birmingham, United Kingdom  
© 2017 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Pu blication rights 
licensed to ACM.  
ACM ISBN 978 -1-4503 -5367 -0/17/10…$15.00  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3157754.3157772  
62action, Asian American ’s career development has a barrier and the 
cap in educational institutions to limit the number of students of 
Asian descent. Thus the expression of “bamboo ceiling ” is used to 
explain this typical phenomenon, as the derivative of “glass 
ceiling”. 
2.2 Model Minority Stereotype 
In spite of the massive unfairness to people of Asian background 
in workforce and education, inequalities against Asian American 
community are always neglected because they are subjected to 
“model minority ” with highest education level and considerable 
income. Similar to other major minority groups, Asian American 
had experienced crucial unjust treatments for a long time. Before 
the 1950s, Asian Americans were commonly stereotyped in 
“devious, inscrutable, inassimilable, and other overtly adverse 
ways” (Lee, p.n). After the 1960s civil rights movements, media 
and politics began to disabuse themselves of prejudices against 
Asians. In 1984, President Ronald Reagan praised Asian 
American for letting an American dream come true. During the 
1980s, media reported that “Asian Americans have higher school 
grades and test scores, are physically and mentally healthy, have 
lower rates of criminal activities and almost no juvenile 
delinquency, and have a highest average income among all racial 
groups in the United States ” (Takaki, 62). According to Cheng, 
people in other ethnic groups judged Asian American by model 
minority stereotype (Cheng &Hawks, 1119). White people in 
working class and black people regard Asians as the threat to their 
social domination and the primary competitor in the job market. 
Due to all these stereotypes labeled on Asian American, society 
doesn't recognize Asians as the typical minority groups that are in 
need of attention and any other sort of help. 
Immense researches have been conducted on model minority 
myth and the researchers ’ interests on this stereotype however is 
still growing. For example, the study in this area began to emerge 
in the 1960s. (Peterson, 49) And in the 1990s (Delluchi &Do, 30, 
Fong, 46, Kobayashi 35, Mayeda, 50) also conducted many types 
of research that described the limitations that the rigid stereotype 
placed on Asian Americans. However, after the millennium, social 
researchers ’ attentions switch to the topic of model minority 
stereotype. (Cheng, 18; Lee, 27; Nance, 5). The most famous and 
accomplished scholar on this subject is Stacey Lee, the education 
professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Much of Lee ’s 
research work focuses on the problems that Asian American 
students experienced in the society. Her scholarship clarifies the 
dangerous consequences of model minority stereotype : 
“mislabeling Asian Americans as universally successful limits 
access for needy people to get the assistance that they need ” 
(Miller, 40). 
While the glamorous label is attached to Asian American group, 
most of them think they are “invisible or forgotten minority ”. 
Research has shown that not like other ethnics people, they are 
commonly seen ineligible for most of the minority rights of 
underrepresented ethnic groups, and Asian Americans have been 
considered to less likely to report cases of racial prejudices in the 
workplace. Thus, it will be interesting to explore the racial 
discrimination against model minority people to fill in the gaps in 
civil rights area. 
2.3 Racial Inequalities in Education 
Besides the racial prejudices that Asian Americans have 
experienced in the workplace, the imparity issues are much 
common in the education system, especially in college admission 
process. Although the Asian community is regarded as the fast-growing minority race after the millennium, Asian American 
amount to the 5 percent of total population and are considered as 
the third underrepresented minority group (US. Census Bureau, 
p.n). Nevertheless, elite college executives pointed out the 
concerns that “there were too many Asians enrolled in higher 
education system”  (Jaschik, p n). Universities are biased since 
they take different standards when evaluating applications from 
Asian Americans. According to the data from the national study of 
college experience, Asian applicants have to have 140 SAT points 
higher than Caucasians, 320 SAT points higher than Latinos and 
450 SAT points higher than African-Americans. As a result, the 
Asian community is in fear of increased discrimination as made 
evident in the qualification standards measures. “An annual 
meeting of the National Association for College Admission 
Counseling documented that to reduce this case of discrimination 
Asian students are warned not to identify their race and ethnicity 
box on applications to avoid potential biases in admission to the 
nation’s top colleges ” (Washington, 23). 
2.4 Limitations of Previous Research 
The reason behind the weakness of previous study partially results 
from the induction problem is the fact that they have constantly 
used the conclusion from something happened in the past and 
therefore the past data cannot result in the same analysis of the 
overall situation. We cannot conclude with the certainty that 
Asian American are facing discrimination in college admission, 
even though this kind of inequality has been verified many times 
by the real cases happened on people with Asian background. 
From this case, it ’s important to strengthen the finding from 
previous researches and make it more precise. We have to develop 
a statistical model to access the degree of racial preference in 
college admission. 
3. RESEARCH PROBLEM 
For many years, the question of whether universities have applied 
racial preferences in admission process has been a controversial 
issue for many decades but the debate came back to public 
attention in 2015 when Asian American community asked to 
investigate Ivy League schools for their potential discrimination 
against Asian applicants. In response, Harvard University had 
flatly denied the charge that the “Just for Asian ” admission 
standard was involved during the process and said, “they used a 
holistic approach and evaluated each applicant individually in an 
effort to build a diverse class ” (Belkin, 201). However, we cannot 
deny the fact that Asian American student must have more 
achievements in academic performance to stand a considerable 
chance of admission when his competitive counterpart is white or 
other minority ethnics. 
3.1 Statement of Hypothesis 
The purpose of analyzing this concept lingering people ’s mind is 
to evaluate the existence of application of racial preferences 
during the college admission process. To achieve this goal, there 
is a need to examine whether the race and ethnicity are correlated 
to admission decisions, by controlling other relative variables 
constant. If this hypothesis is validated through testing, then we 
can make a conclusion that the admission standard used by 
universities is unconstitutional. 
3.2 Considered Variables 
The independent variable in this hypothesis would be race and 
ethnicity. In this case, since the variable is race and the options we 
need to consider in the test are the major ethnics groups living in 
the United States, which compose of over 95 percent of the total 
63population. This variable has four attributes in this case: whites, 
African American, Hispanics and Asian Americans. They also 
build up the main student body of universities and colleges in the 
United States. 
The goal of this study is to investigate the cause-effect 
relationship between race and ethnicity and admission decisions 
so that the dependent variable in this case is admission result. Our 
study will evaluate how admission decisions are affected when 
race factor takes part in the admission processes. 
Apart from race and ethnicity, there are other factors will be able 
to affect admission committee ’s decision-making, such as 
applicants’ standard test scores, high school grades, their 
extracurricular Activities, leadership experience and personal 
connections to school alumni. These variables will also be 
deliberated seriously during the admission process, but in this case, 
only race and ethnicity will be considered. 
Since the independent variable to be considered during the test is 
the applicants ’ ethnic background, there is no need to evaluate 
other variables in case we need to produce fair and accurate 
results. The first variable to be controlled is applicants ’ academic 
performance, that including SAT and ACT scores, high school 
GPAs. These are the academic measures used to test students ’ 
academic knowledge and the more they achievements in this 
assessments generally means the higher chances to get admitted. 
All participants in the analysis must be of the same academic level 
during the test. The second controlling variable is alumni 
connections because universities are always willing to admit 
students from alumni families. The third controlling variable is 
applicants’ gender, in this study only male applicant is considered 
so that sex factor will not be able to contribute to the decision-
making process. The last controlling is applicants ’ residential 
status because public agencies have to recruit large percent of in-
state students in order to obtain substantial budget and policy 
support from state government. 
In general, these control variables are not of primary interests in 
this study and they should be held constant during the experiment, 
in order to examine the relative relationship of racial issue and 
admission decision-making. 
4. RESEARCH DESIGN 
This research study will be conducted by the logistic regression 
analysis of admission data obtaining from the University of 
Virginia. This study monitors the fall class of 2005, 2006, 2007 
and 2008. The information was requested on each applicant ’s 
admission status, standard test scores, high school GPAs, racial 
status and gender; whether the applicant was in state resident and 
whether his parents were school alumni. For the racial part, only 
students of Caucasian, African American, Asian American and 
Hispanic will be analyzed. Native Americans, Alaska Natives and 
Native Hawaiians will be neglected in the study because their 
numbers are too small in the context. 
Due to the degree of information openness, overall reputation and 
demographics Asian students on campus, University of Virginia is 
the only considered sample that satisfies all the three requirements 
stated above. To date, only state universities and colleges have 
adopted open data policy, which makes data are entirely free and 
without restriction to reach by public under the enforcement from 
state government. However, private universities are entirely self-
funded and not under government regulation, which means that 
open data policy is not applicable to them. Because of this 
situation, only the public universities ’ database is accessible and information will be obtained anonymously for students ’ privacy. 
Another reason to choose the University of Virginia is its high 
reputation and popularity among Asian American people. UVA is 
regarded as one of the top state universities in the United States. 
Regarding the recent US NEWS College ranking, UVA boasts the 
second best in public universities right after UC Berkeley. But due 
to UC Berkeley ’s Asian Friendly admission policy-Asian 
American makes up the largest portion of student body at 42.3 
percent (Mei, 125). The data from the Berkeley is not picked 
because it might misdirect the test result. In contrast, UVA ’s 
student profile by ethnicity is almost the same as the national 
college students ’ demographics. In addition to its student body by 
ethnics, UVA ’s high-level academic reputation in business and 
science area also attracts many Asian American students to apply 
for. 
In this case, a logistic regression equation will be created to 
predict admission results by race and ethnicity. Standard test 
scores, high school GPA and other background characteristics are 
included in the equation as statistical control variables. Logistic 
regression method with various controlling variables is used 
because of the natural features of the data obtained. During the 
test, correlation coefficients will be used to explain the 
relationship between race and ethnicity and admission decisions. 
If a negative correlation coefficient of -1.0 is computed, it 
represents the perfect negative relationship between predictor 
variable and the outcome variable. Otherwise, if the correlation 
coefficient is 1.0, it means the perfect positive relationship 
between the two main variables. To be honest, correlation and 
regression analysis requires the analysis of non-binary outcome 
variable, but admission decision status in this case is in the format 
of binary: rejection or admission. To solve this issue, we have to 
rely on not only multiple regression equations but also the 
following odds ratios (Yong S., et al, 69). 
Odds ratio and correlation coefficient are very much alike and the 
main difference between them is that odds ratio varies from zero 
to infinity. If odds ratio equals 1, then two comparing groups have 
the same admission possibility. If odds ratio is greater than 1, then 
members in Group A will have the higher chances to be admitted 
than the members in Group B. If odds ratio is less than 1, then 
members in Group B are most likely to be accepted. The 
importance of odds ratio is that it expresses the concise and 
explicit measurement of the degree of racial preference in the 
admission process. 
Logistic regression equations calculating the admission chances 
are based on University of Virginia ’s 2005-2008 applicants ’ pool, 
with various background factors controlled. And the ratio odds of 
admission from these regression equations are derived for each 
minority races relative to the whites. 
We also need to consider the statistical significance during the 
logistic regression analysis. The level of statistical significance is 
expressed in the form of “P- Value” (P <= 0.05). Any p-value 
greater than 0.05 means the rejection of hypothesis and there is no 
statistical significance between the two variables. 
5. DISCUSSION 
5.1 Expected Findings 
It is expected that the University of Virginia made significant 
preference to African American applicants. The odds ratios are 
very large when African American and Hispanic application 
compare to the whites. For Asian American relative to the white 
applicants, the odds ratio is supposed to be slight because from 
64school's admission database, Asian American has the lowest 
acceptance rate among the racial group. 
In this research, we test the roles played by preferences for race 
and ethnicity. According to the admission data obtained from the 
most selective state university, hopefully we will get the solution 
that African American applicants get the most significant 
admission bonuses for their racial background, while coming from 
an Asian background is the most disadvantage characteristic 
during the evaluation of college application. 
5.2 Limitations 
On the other hand, the logistic regression analysis might overstate 
the accuracy of prediction on admission decision-making. For 
instance, the logit model is not able to analyze continuous 
variables. From the logistic regression equation, we can get the 
conclusion that in comparison to other minority applicants, Asian 
Americans have the least chance to be selected for college 
admission when they have the similar academic performance and 
personal background. Nevertheless, the admission committee not 
only evaluates applications based on these characteristics but also 
on applicants ’ personal statement and extracurricular activities. 
And it’s not applicable to analyze these two factors with logistic 
regression equation. Therefore, this kind of overconfidence on this 
method would result in unreliable test result. 6. REFERENCES 
[1] Belkin, Douglas. Asian-American groups seek investigation 
into Ivy League admissions. The Street Wall Journal . (2016): 
Dow Jones & Company. Web. 
[2] Chao, Ruth K. Beyond parental control and authoritarian 
parenting style: Understanding Chinese parenting through the 
cultural notion of training.  Child Development . 65, 4 (1994), 
1111-1119. 
[3] Hyun, Jane. Breaking the bamboo ceiling: Career strategies 
for Asians. Harper Collins , 2005. 
[4] Le, C.N. School of education at johns Hopkins university- A 
closer look at Asian Americans and education.  School of 
Education at Johns Hopkins University-A Closer Look at 
Asian Americans and Education . (2005) 
[5] Liza Mundy. Cracking the Bamboo Ceiling. The Atlantic . 
(2014), Web. 
[6] Park, Yong S., et al. Acculturation, enculturation, parental 
adherence to Asian cultural values, parenting styles, and 
family conflict among Asian American college students. 
Asian American Journal of Psychology . 1, 1 (2010) , 67-79. 
[7] Scott Jaschik. Too Asian? Inside Higher Ed (2006), n. pag. 
Web. 
[8] Steve Cohen. Asian-Americans are indeed getting screwed 
by Harvard (But not how they think). Observer N. p (2015): 
Web. 
 
65