7
Computersand Peoplewith Disabilities
EPHRAIM P. GLINERT
National ScienceFoundation
and
BRYANT W.YORK
Portland State University
Editors’ comments: “Computers and People with Disabilities” is a reprint of an a rticle originally
published in Communications of the ACM in 1992. In this article, Glinert and York issued a
“call-to-arms” for research and development on technologi es for people with disabilities. Speciﬁ-
cally, they highlighted that human-computer interfaces at the time generally failed to take into
account the needs of disabled users. Their challenge was to c hange computing culture to ad-
dress this need. Their article remains timely today in its co nsideration of government, industry,
and private foundations working with researchers to achiev e accessible technology. With the re-
cent launch of Transactions on Accessible Computing , this seems an appropriate time to consider
progress in the ﬁeld since, as well as current research trend s.
The reprinting of this article is followed by four commentar ies by leaders in accessibility
research. Each was cited in the 1992 article and each now give s their view on how the ﬁeld
has progressed since that time. In their commentaries, some themes emerge and new technologies
are discussed. In short, their commentaries point to both a g reat deal of progress and a lack of
progress. All four of the commentators note areas where comp uting continues to present barriers
rather than assist users with disabilities.
Alistair Edwards sets the stage with a look back at interface s and input technologies popular
in 1992, with attention paid to access problems related to gr aphical user interfaces (GUIs) that
have consumed much research energy since 1992. Alan Newell h ighlights disability concerns that
were not given large research consideration in 1992, but whi ch have now become signiﬁcant due,
in large part, to changes in global demographics. Speciﬁcal ly, he brings visibility to research on
older adults and cognitively disabled users.
A number of advances in technology and methodology since 199 2 are discussed by the commen-
tators. The ubiquity of computing and its critical adoption in the world today are highlighted.
The commentators reﬂect, for example, on technologies prod uced by research for disabled users
that have now impacted mainstream offerings on standards fo r accessibility that have emerged
worldwide and their impact and on assistive technologies th at have been developed. Critically,
the proliferation of the World Wide Web was not foreseen in 19 92 and its use by people with
This article is reprinted from the Communications of the ACM, 35, 5 (May 1992), 32–35.
Authors’ addresses: E. P. Glinert, Program Director, Human -Centered Computing (HCC) Cluster,
CISE/IIS Division, Room 1125, National Science Foundation , 4201 Wilson Boulevard, Arlington,
VA 22230; email: eglinert@nsf.gov.; B. W. York, Computer Sc ience Department, Portland State
University, 1900 SW 4th Ave, Suite 120, Portland, OR 97201; e mail: york@cecs.pdx.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of thi s work for personal or classroom use is
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or dist ributed for proﬁt or direct commercial
advantage and that copies show this notice on the ﬁrst page or initial screen of a display along
with the full citation. Copyrights for components of this wo rk owned by others than ACM must be
honored. Abstracting with credits is permitted. To copy oth erwise, to republish, to post on servers,
to redistribute to lists, or to use any component of this work in other works requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee. Permission may be requested from Pu blications Dept., ACM, Inc., 2 Penn
Plaza, Suite 701, New York, NY 10121-0701, USA, fax +1 (212) 8 69-0481, or permissions@acm.org.
c/circlecopyrt2008 ACM 1936-7228/2008/10-ART7 $5.00 DOI: 10.1145/14087 60.1408761. http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/1408760.1408761.
ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing, Vol. 1, No. 2, Art icle 7, Pub. date: October 2008.7: 2·E.P.GlinertandB.W.York
disabilities is discussed. Gregg Vanderheiden considers t he opportunity afforded by the Web to
provide widespread availability of accessible software.
Glinert and York discussed the need for design for disabilit y. While research relevant to users
with disabilities is gaining momentum, the commentators in dicate that users with disabilities still
struggle with much of today’s IT. The commentators note curr ent trends toward designs that take
into account disabled users. Notably, Richard Ladner ends h is commentary by mentioning the
issue of empowerment. Users with disabilities have moved be yond simply needing the protections
of regulation that were emerging in 1992, to being active par ticipants in designing solutions to
allow full participation in the current social, political, and economic environments.
Together, these articles provide a great deal of food for tho ught on technology advances and
new considerations of accessible technology. Has the chang e in computing culture envisioned by
Glinert and York taken hold?
VICKI L. H ANSON and A NDREW SEARS
Co-Editors in Chief
Categories and Subject Descriptors: K.2 [ Computing Milieux ]: History of Computing—
Software ; K.4.2 [ Computers and Society ]: Social Issues— Assistive technologies for persons with
disabilities
General Terms: Human Factors, Design
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Accessibility, HCI, inte rfaces, Web, ubiquitous computing,
inclusive design, universal access
ACM Reference Format:
Glinert, E. P. and York, B. W. 2008. Computers and people with disabilities. ACM Trans. Access.
Comput. 1, 2, Article 7 (October 2008), 7 pages. DOI = 10.1145 /1408760.1408761. http://doi.acm.
org/10.1145/1408760.1408761.
“Discrimination against the handicapped was perceived by C ongress
to be most often the product not of invidious animous, but rat her of
thoughtlessness and indifference – of benign neglect. . . Fo r exam-
ple, elimination of architectural barriers was one of the ce ntral aims
of the Act, yet such barriers were clearly not erected with th e aim or
intent of excluding the handicapped [105 S. Ct. at 718-19].”
One might expect that the rapid technological growth and the increasing
computerization of society would lead to innovations that w ould remove many
of the roadblocks faced by disabled people in our society. Un fortunately, that is
the not the case. Instead, access to information and high-te ch careers by dis-
abled people has been hampered by shortsightedness on the pa rt of computer
and telecommunications system designers. Most hardware an d software has
been, and continues to be, designed by and for people who are n ot disabled.
The reason for this, most often quoted by computer and system s builders, is
that “design for disability” is not cost effective. This pro blem is exacerbated by
the relative paucity of research into those issues most rele vant to people with
disabilities. This special section therefore has a twofold purpose:
—to show that research related to computers and people with d isabilities is a
valid area of scientiﬁc endeavor, and in particular of compu ter science; and
ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing, Vol. 1, No. 2, Art icle 7, Pub. date: October 2008.ComputersandPeoplewithDisabilities ·7: 3
—to show that “design for disability” in computer and teleco mmunications sys-
tems is not only cost effective, but also leads to beneﬁcial i nnovations for
users who are not disabled.
As Alistair Edwards has recently written [Edwards et al. 199 1], in the past,
research related to human-computer interfaces
has largely been directed at taking account of quite subtle v aria-
tions (such as novices versus experts). More signiﬁcant var iations
in users’ abilities — such as whether a user can see a screen or type
on a keyboard – are described as “disabilities” and accommod ating
them has been seen as a separate topic, a specialty of a few peo -
ple, outside the mainstream of human-computer interaction . It has
perhaps been seen more as a social service than a scientiﬁc or engi-
neering discipline. . . The study of human-computer interac tion has
[now] reached a stage of maturity when it should be embracing the
broader community.
When one looks at the data, it is surprising to see how large a s egment of
the population of the United States has some form of disabili ty. In 1990 the
National Science Foundation formed the Task Force on Person s with Disabili-
ties to determine how NSF could best promote programs in this area.1As this
report points out, over half a million Americans are legally blind; this means
that their visual acuity, with correcting lenses, is no more than 20/200 in the
better eye. Furthermore, of the approximately 5,000,000 sc ientists and engi-
neers in the U.S., it is estimated that as many as 100,000 have some from of
physical disability. As Carl Brown, the author of one of the a rticles in this
special section, has noted, “we are all disabled, it is just a matter of degree”
[Brown 1989].
Federal, state, and local governments have responded to the plight of people
with certain kinds of disabilities, primarily with the goal of improving physical
access. Wheelchair ramps, wheelchair-height public telep hones and water cool-
ers, special restroom features, TDD devices, and closed cap tioning have been
ubiquitous. Access to computer and telecommunications equ ipment, however,
as been slower in coming.
What is being done? At the General Services Administration, Susan Brum-
mel directs the clearinghouse on Computer Accommodation, w hich provides a
variety of information on new and existing assistive techno logies, public laws,
policies, and practices. For over 30 years, the Veterans Adm inistration has
supported work in rehabilitation engineering; many intere sting projects have
resulted from this effort. The National Science Foundation has funded sev-
eral individual research efforts, as well as some special pr ojects. For example,
NSF cofunded the First National Search for Computer Applica tions for Per-
sons with Disabilities in 1980, and the Second National Sear ch in 1991, both
of which generated many innovative ideas which have since be en developed
1Copies of the resulting report, dated October 1999, are avai lable from the CISE Directorate’s
Ofﬁce of Cross-Disciplinary Activities.
ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing, Vol. 1, No. 2, Art icle 7, Pub. date: October 2008.7: 4·E.P.GlinertandB.W.York
into commercial products. Through its Small Business Innov ative Research
(SBIR) program, NSF has also funded small companies develop ing assistive
technologies.
Three major pieces of legislation relating to people with di sabilities have
been enacted in recent years by the federal government:
—Section 508 of Public Law 99-506 (1986);
—the Technology Related Assistance for Individuals with Di sabilities Act of
1988 (Public Law 100-407); and
—the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (Public Law 101 -336)
These laws establish guidelines for access to electronic eq uipment in the
federal workplace. They also make funds available to assist the states in
their efforts to improve access for people with disabilitie s, to support individual
research projects, and to provide graduate fellowships for people with disabil-
ities. There is more to be done. Private institutions and fou ndations must
play a greater role. Most important, the prevailing compute r culture must be
changed.
Consider, for example, the window-based interfaces that co me with most
modern personal computers and workstations. Menus, resour ce ﬁles, or other
hooks are typically provided to allow users to customize the ir working environ-
ment to suit their personal tastes. Windows can be repositio ned and resized;
foreground and background colors can be changed. The size an d style of the
font used to display text can often be adjusted. Sometimes, e ven keyboard
functionality (bindings) can be reconﬁgured.
Options such as these are no less valuable (and perhaps more) for visually
handicapped users than they are for users at large, but they a re not enough.
What is required are mechanisms for fundamentally modifyin g the visual as-
pects of the display in conjunction with the manner in which i nformation is
conveyed. In the absence of such mechanisms, modern window- based inter-
faces are more often a curse than a blessing to handicapped in dividuals.
One solution is to design innovative software tools. An exce llent example
is provided by IBM’s ACCESS-DOS systems software tools, or t heir personal
computers. These have been distributed free of charge since the late spring
of 1991, and allow people who suffer from a variety of physica l disabilities
(e.g., cerebral palsy) to use conventional input devices. A second example is
Rudy Vener’s MAGNEX editor for the Commodore Amiga personal computer
[Vener and Glinert 1988], which features a novel cross-hair cursor to help peo-
ple who suffer from severe tunnel vision in locating the curr ent typing position.
While one of the two converging lines which comprise the cros s-hair is verti-
cal, as would be expected, the other is anchored at one endpoi nt to the upper
lefthand corner of the screen, as schematically shown in Fig ure 1. The di-
agonal component of the cross-hair provides a constant init ial reference point,
from which the eye is drawn naturally down to where the diagon al and horizon-
tal lines intersect. This permits the eye to rapidly home in o n the appropriate
character.
ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing, Vol. 1, No. 2, Art icle 7, Pub. date: October 2008.ComputersandPeoplewithDisabilities ·7: 5
Fig. 1. Schematic view of the MAGNEX display with cross-hair cursor.
Quite another approach has been successfully employed in Bl issymbolics
[Helfman 1981], a semantically-based visual language that has proved re-
markably effective as the basis of alternative communicati on systems for peo-
ple who are severely disabled. The language contains a core v ocabulary of over
2,400 symbols. Although some of these are pictographs which depict the out-
line or shape of the object they represent, most are ideograp hs that derive from
a ﬁxed set of so-called key graphic forms, each having a well- deﬁned root mean-
ing associated with it; see Figure 2. Users who need to expand the system can
do so by modifying existing symbols and/or by generating new ones by apply-
ing logical strategies and simple syntactic rules. In the HY PERBLISS system
developed by Shalit et al. [1988], for the Apple Macintosh pe rsonal computer,
the user applies his/her acquired knowledge of the structur e of Blissymbolics
ideographs to synthesize or approximate (in his/her mind) t he graphical repre-
sentation of the object he/she wishes to “talk” about. The us er then retrieves
the desired symbol by selecting one of its component parts fr om the keyboard.
As illustrated by the preceding examples, it is not possible to give adequate
representation, in just a few papers, to the broad spectrum o f research relating
to people with disabilities. Even if we could do so, there wou ld be little point,
for most readers would then miss the forest for the trees. We h ave therefore
elected to divide the space allotted to us between two differ ent types of articles.
The ﬁrst article, by Brown, provides an overview of several d ifferent types
of currently available assistive technology. Speciﬁc refe rences to products and
manufacturers should prove especially valuable to many rea ders. The authors
also suggest prescriptions for possible future uses of tech nology to improve
access for people with disabilities.
The remainder of the articles in our special section describ e speciﬁc re-
search projects in various stages of completion. The lion’s share of such work,
both by the editors of this special section [Glinert and Ladn er 1984; York and
Karshmer 1989] and by others [Edwards 1989; Weber 1987], has focused on
the needs of people who are blind or otherwise visually impai red. The four
articles that comprise this part of the special section focu s on a very differ-
ent and no less important segment of the disabled community, namely people
ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing, Vol. 1, No. 2, Art icle 7, Pub. date: October 2008.7: 6·E.P.GlinertandB.W.York
Fig. 2. Examples of Blissymbolics ideographs (after Shalit et al. [1988]). Top row (left to right):
I, my, our. Middle row: resident, residential institution. Bottom row: school, teacher.
who have problems communicating with their peers because of hearing impair-
ments, degenerative diseases, or severe injury. The articl es by Alm, Arnott,
and Newell, and by Pausch and Williams, discuss two approach es to providing
speech synthesizers for people who are nonvocal. The articl e by Demasco and
McCoy proposes a solution to some of the problems faced by peo ple who suffer
from cerebral palsy and similar disorders when they need to i nput text to a
computer. Finally, Kukich discusses improvements to the te lecommunications
network for the deaf.
We think that all ﬁve of the articles included here are excell ent examples
of the high-quality, exciting, and socially relevant resea rch that can be carried
out in an effort to develop and apply assistive technology.
Those who would like more information about issues relating to computers
and people with disabilities are encouraged to contact ACM’ s newly revital-
ized Special Interest Group on Computers and the Physically Handicapped
(SIGCAPH), which now publishes a quarterly newsletter. SIG CAPH is also
planning a research-oriented conference for 1993, to focus on the leading-edge
technology in this ﬁeld.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank all of the referees for graciously dona ting their time to
review and comment on this special section.
ABOUT THEAUTHORS
EPHRAIM P. GLINERT is an associate professor of computer sci ence at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. In addition to computer -based assistive tech-
nology for the handicapped, his current research interests include visual and
multimodal human computer interfaces, multiparadigm prog ramming lan-
guages and systems, and software engineering tools for larg e-scale projects. In
1991 he was elected chair of SIGCAPH, ACM’s Special Interest Group for Com-
puters and the Physically Handicapped. Author’s Present Ad dress: Depart-
ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing, Vol. 1, No. 2, Art icle 7, Pub. date: October 2008.ComputersandPeoplewithDisabilities ·7: 7
ment of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institut e, Troy, NY 12180;
email: glinert@cs.rpi.edu.
BRYANT W. YORK is an associate professor and director of rese arch at the
College of Computer Science at Northeastern University. Hi s interests include
his design of a programming environment for blind programme rs, organization
of the 1989 NSF-sponsored workshop on Computers and Persons with Disabil-
ities (CAPD), and work in the area of algorithms for massivel y parallel compu-
tation. Author’s Present Address: College of Computer Scie nce, Northeastern
University, Boston, MA 02115; email:york@dworkin.ccs, no rtheastern.edu.
REFERENCES
BROWN , C. 1989. Oral communication.
EDWARDS , A. D. N. 1989. Sound track: An auditory interface for blind u sers. Human-Comput.
Interac. 4 , 1, 45–66.
EDWARDS , A. D. N., B RUMMEL , S., V ANDERHEIDEN , G., AND WILLIGES , R. C. 1991. Call for
participation. In the Workshop on Human-Computer Interaction and Users with S pecial Needs
(CHI) . (distributed via email).
GLINERT , E. E, AND LADNER , R. E. 1984. A large-font virtual terminal interface: A soft ware
prosthesis for the visually impaired. Commun. ACM 27 , 6 (Jun.), 567–572.
HELFMAN , E. S. 1981. Blissymbolics: Speaking Without Speech . Elsevier Nelson, New York.
SHALIT , A., B OONZAIER , D. A., U NDERHILL , L. G., AND WILLIAMS -SHORT , R. 1988. Multidi-
mensional scaling of Blissymbolics data. Int. Res. Rep., De partment of Biomedical Engineering,
University of Cape Town.
VENER , A. R. AND GLINERT , E. P. 1988. MAGNEX: A text editor for the visually impaired. In
Proceedings of the 16th Annual ACM Computer Science Confere nce, Atlanta, GA, 23–25.
WEBER , G. 1987. Gestures as a means for the blind to interact with a c omputer. In Proceedings
of the 2nd IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (I NTERACT) , Stuttgart, Germany,
593–595.
YORK, B. W. AND KARSHMER , A. I. 1989. Tools to support blind programmers. In Proceedings of
the 17th Annual ACM Computer Science Conference , Louisville, KY, 5–11.
ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing, Vol. 1, No. 2, Art icle 7, Pub. date: October 2008.