Online  Dating  as  Context  to  Design  Sexual  Consent  Technology  
with  Women  and  LGBTQ+  Stakeholders  
Douglas  Zytko  
Oakland  University  
Rochester,  Michigan,  USA  
zytko@oakland.edu  Nicholas  Furlo  
Oakland  University  
Rochester,  Michigan,  USA  
nbfurlo@oakland.edu  
ABSTRACT  
This  paper  uses  online  dating  as  a  context  to  explore  futures  for  
sexual  consent  technology:  systems  that  mediate  how  partners  ex-
change  consent  in  order  to  prevent  nonconsensual  sex.  Motivated  
by  evidence  that  sexual  consent  is  already  mediated  by  computers  
in  ways  that  challenge  perceptions  of  sexual  agency,  we  present  
a  participatory  design  study  in  the  United  States  with  17  women  
and  LGBTQ+  stakeholders  (demographics  at  disproportionate  risk  
of  sexual  violence).  Contrary  to  consent  apps  that  are  used  right  
before  sex  to  record  irrevocable  consent,  participants  envisioned  
alternative  consent  technology  being  used  across  online  and  ofine  
interaction  to  normalize  candid  dialogue  about  sexual  expectations  
and  informed  verbal  consent  throughout  sex.  Findings  demonstrate  
opportunity  for  dating  apps  and  associated  technologies  to  foster  
voluntary  adoption  of  afrmative  consent,  which  has  been  widely  
advocated  in  public  health  for  sexual  violence  prevention  yet  his-
torically  under-adopted  by  the  general  public.  Content  warning:  
graphic  descriptions  of  sexual  activity.  
CCS  CONCEPTS  
•  Human-centered  computing  →  Participatory  design; •  So-
cial  and  professional  topics  →  Gender;  Sexual  orientation.  
KEYWORDS  
consent,  afrmative  consent,  sex,  sexual  violence,  online  dating,  
dating  apps,  participatory  design  
ACM  Reference  Format:  
Douglas  Zytko  and  Nicholas  Furlo.  2023.  Online  Dating  as  Context  to  Design
Sexual  Consent  Technology  with  Women  and  LGBTQ+  Stakeholders.  In
Proceedings  of  the  2023  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing
Systems  (CHI  ’23),  April  23–28,  2023,  Hamburg,  Germany.  ACM,  New  York
NY,  USA,  17  pages.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580911   
  
, 
1  INTRODUCTION  
Sexual  experience  is  mediated  by  computers  in  a  variety  of  ways.  
Dating  apps  are  used  for  discovering  sexual  partners  near  instan-
taneously  [20,  75]  and  for  sharing  sex-related  information  such  as  
Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for  personal  or  
classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or  distributed  
for  proft  or  commercial  advantage  and  that  copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  
on  the  frst  page.  Copyrights  for  components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  
author(s)  must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior  specifc  permission  
and/or  a  fee.  Request  permissions  from  permissions@acm.org.  
CHI  ’23,  April  23–28,  2023,  Hamburg,  Germany  
©  2023  Copyright  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to  ACM.  
ACM  ISBN  978-1-4503-9421-5/23/04...$15.00  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580911  HIV  status  [54,  129].  Sex  toys  [48]  can  enable  intimate  moments  be-
tween  long-distance  partners  and  the  physically  disabled  [47].  Even  
emerging  technologies  like  VR  have  augmented  online  pornogra-
phy  [23,  136]  and  interaction  with  sexual  partners  [115],  and  sex  
robots  are  on  the  horizon  [111,  123].  
Perhaps  the  most  crucial  element  of  sexual  experience  that  com-
puters  can  mediate  is  the  exchange  of  consent—or  agreement—to  
sexual  activity  [74,  113]  because  the  absence  of  consent  is  the  defn-
ing  characteristic  of  sexual  violence:  sexual  acts  that  are  “committed  
or  attempted  by  another  person  without  freely  given  consent  of  
the  victim”  [13].  Sexual  violence  does  not  necessitate  physical  force  
as  the  term  may  imply;  it  often  occurs  without  intent  to  cause  
harm  or  recognition  by  the  victim  that  harm  is  occurring  [27,  77].  
This  is  due  to  problematic  consent  exchange  practices  (how  one  
gives  and  perceives  to  receive  consent)  such  as  interpreting  consent  
through  ambiguous  nonverbal  cues  [40,  63],  and  through  sexual  
scripts  [118]  that  challenge  one’s  perception  of  sexual  agency  (the  
right  to  decline  sex)  such  as  the  gendered  belief  that  women  are  
asking  for  sex  based  on  their  clothing  choice  [58].  
While  various  computer-mediated  solutions  to  sexual  violence  
have  been  discussed  in  HCI  literature  (e.g.,  [5,  106]),  there  is  a  lack  
of  solutions  that  address  consent  practices  as  a  root  cause.  We  argue  
that  design  of  computer-mediated  consent  to  sex  needs  to  be  revis-
ited  and  expanded  in  light  of  evidence  that  current  consent  tech-
nologies  actually  perpetuate,  rather  than  prevent,  sexual  violence.  
Controversial  “consent  apps”  that  allow  users  to  record—but  not  
revoke—consent  to  sex  have  been  criticized  for  subverting  sexual  
agency  (what  if  a  partner  changes  their  mind  during  sex?)  [90,  98].  
Dating  apps  have  also  inadvertently  become  consent  technologies  
that  scafold  harmful  consent  practices  and  sexual  scripts  [75,  103];  
for  instance  online  daters  have  assumed  consent  to  sex  through  
interpretation  of  emojis  and  profle  pictures,  leading  them  to  make  
sexual  advances  in-person  without  confrming  that  their  partners  
desire  sex  [139].  
The  importance  of  sexual  consent  technology  has  been  recog-
nized  by  potential  users  and  researchers  alike.  LGBTQ+  online  
daters  have  tried  to  repurpose  dating  apps  as  makeshift  afrmative  
consent  technologies  in  an  (often  failed)  attempt  for  more  transpar-
ent  discussion  of  sex  and  consent  practices  before  meeting  partners  
face-to-face  [139].  Women  in  a  diferent  study  requested  more  in-
formation  about  consent  in  dating  app  interfaces  [3].  Researchers  
have  likewise  considered  consent  an  important  aspect  of  computer-
mediated  sexual  wellbeing  [64,  121],  and  design  patterns  for  giving  
computer-mediated  consent  to  humans  and  even  sex  robots  have  
been  suggested  by  researchers  [90,  122].  Yet  there  is  an  absence  of  
user  involvement  in  consent  technology  design,  particularly  from  
stakeholders  most  at  risk  of  sexual  violence.CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
Research questions driving our work include: (RQ1) What 
should sexual consent technology do, or what should it mean to me-
diate consent to sex? (RQ2) Where and when should sexual consent 
technology be used? (RQ3) What types of devices or applications could 
be designed into sexual consent technology? 
In this paper we report a participatory design study conducted 
in the United States (n=17) about how technology should mediate 
practices of exchanging consent to sex. We use online dating as 
a focal context due the ubiquity of using social computing plat-
forms for augmenting sexual encounters—either through dating 
apps [6, 21, 31, 37, 38] or social media apps (e.g., “sliding into DMs”) 
[28]—therefore providing various intervention points across an 
online-to-ofine process for participants to envision new consent 
technology. Participants identifed as LGBTQ+ and/or women; de-
mographics that are disproportionately victims of nonconsensual 
sex [43, 82, 120]. Contributions of the study include: 
• A new way to conceptualize what consent technology should 
do from the perspectives of women and LGBTQ+ people. In 
contrast to consent apps that serve as ledgers of irrevocable 
consent [90, 98], participants envisioned consent technology 
as tools to be used beyond the very moment sex occurs. 
They envisioned computer mediation of consent spanning 
across online and in-person interaction to normalize candid 
dialogue about sexual expectations leading up to sex and, 
ultimately, informed verbal consent exchange throughout 
sexual activity. 
• Specifc design concepts that demonstrate opportunity for con-
sent technology to increase adoption of afrmative consent [61], 
which is a widely advocated consent exchange model for 
mitigating sexual violence [62, 73, 95, 104, 112] yet one that 
is historically under-adopted by the general public [51, 132]. 
Design themes include: 1) consent technology that assumes 
responsibility for initiating and maintaining conversation 
about transient sexual expectations, 2) consent as interface 
design pattern to ensure mutual comfort with discussing sex, 
and 3) supplementing verbal consent with machine trans-
lation of latent sexual discomfort. Devices and applications 
that participants envisioned being used pursuant to these 
design themes included dating apps, mobile games, social 
robots, wearable devices, and augmented reality (AR) glasses. 
2  BACKGROUND  
This section begins by reviewing key themes in research on consent 
to sex beyond HCI to lend context for sexual consent technology. 
We then review HCI research into sex to situate our work amongst 
other facets of computer-mediated sexual experience and sexual 
violence. We conclude by reviewing the state of knowledge for 
computer-mediated consent to sex in order to elucidate the absence 
of stakeholder involvement in design of consent technologies. 
2.1  Theories  and  Practices  of  Consent  to  Sex  
Consent to sex has been a research interest in felds beyond HCI for 
over 30 years, pursuing three general areas: theories of what consent 
is, models of what consent should be, and empirical research into 
how the general public understands and practices consent to sex. Zytko and Furlo 
We review literature across these themes to lend context for sexual 
consent technology. 
Defnitional theories of what consent is have been inconsistent, 
with the literature generally subscribing to one of two interpreta-
tions: consent is a strictly behavioral act independent of one’s actual 
willingness to have sex, and consent is behavior that is refective 
of, and thus dependent on, one’s willingness to have sex. Of note, 
literature across these perspectives tends to discuss consent primar-
ily in the heteronormative context of a woman giving consent to 
a man, thus their applicability to the reverse dynamic or LGBTQ+ 
partnerships can be unclear. 
Literature pertaining to the frst defnition understands consent 
as a purely behavioral or “performative” act of agreement to sex 
[7, 130], independent of whether the performer of the act actually 
wants sex to occur [97, 131], including when force or coercion is 
used to elicit the performative act [33, 94, 127]. Some work cate-
gorizes diferent types consent on the basis of whether coercion 
or force is used [7, 68, 117], although these categories still imply 
that sex is consensual if the performative act is manipulated [18]. 
The literature generally leaves the acts which constitute consent 
up to interpretation of the recipient [88, 93], with some scholars 
[33, 93] asserting that there are certain actions or inactions, includ-
ing silence, that are commonly understood as consent—leading to 
the conclusion that one can accidentally give consent to sex if they 
inadvertently perform such a behavior [18]. 
The other, and more popular, theoretical perspective understands 
consent as behavior representing evidence of a “particular men-
tal state” corresponding to willingness to have sex [81]. For such 
behavior to be a refection of internal willingness to have sex it 
must be voluntarily given [49, 57] and free from force and coer-
cion [49, 57, 59]. Although, there is some debate over whether 
ubiquitous social, economic, and gender power imbalances qualify 
as coercion—and thus whether sex can ever truly be consensual 
[80, 87, 101] (see West [131] for critique of this position). Scholars 
have recognized that willingness to have sex may change during 
a sexual encounter, leading some to characterize consent as an 
ongoing negotiation of giving and assessing signs of “active partic-
ipation” [17, 19, 59]. In this paper we adopt a defnition of consent 
following the “mental state” theorists: as behavior indicative of 
willingness to have sex. 
Along with attempts to describe consent as an already-occurring 
phenomenon, extensive work has pursued new models of what 
consent should mean. The motivations behind this work have been 
to reduce the prevalence of sexual violence through adoption of 
consent behaviors that prevent unwanted sex, as well to diferenti-
ate legal from illegal sexual activity in a court of law (an example to 
the latter would be morally transformative consent which argues 
that consent should render any sexual act legal [130]). Consent 
models designed to reduce sexual violence include communicative 
sexuality [99] and afrmative consent [102], both of which seek 
to shift responsibility for receiving consent onto the initiator of a 
sexual advance instead of on the recipient to refuse. Core tenets 
of afrmative consent include freely given agreement to sex, the 
ability to revoke consent during a sexual act, and informed agree-
ment to specifc sexual acts to reduce misinterpretation over what 
is consenting to [95]. These tenets have been condensed into pro-
motional campaigns and slogans to encourage public adoption suchOnline Dating as Context to Design Sexual Consent Technology with Women and LGBTQ+ Stakeholders CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
as “yes means yes” [39] and Planned Parenthood’s FRIES model 
(Freely given, Reversible, Informed, Enthusiastic, Specifc) [95]. 
Afrmative consent has been widely advocated in literature 
and public policy [14, 26, 35, 36, 88, 92, 95, 102], yet it has been 
critiqued for ignoring social dynamics that infuence consent de-
cisions [44, 102] and for being too burdensome and unrealistic for 
widespread practice [51, 132] (see [88] (p. 464) for an extensive re-
view of afrmative consent criticisms and open questions). At least 
some of this critique is supported with empirical study: afrmative 
consent is not widely practiced [88, 102, 132]. 
The third line of consent research, empirical study of how the 
general public understands consent, has found consent practices 
to be inconsistent with many susceptible to misinterpretation. Per 
Muehlenhard et al.’s review of sexual consent practices: “Most in-
dividuals do not discuss sexual consent [...] explicitly, however; 
instead, they usually rely on more indirect cues and signals, which 
others might interpret as indicative of willingness” [88] (p. 462). 
Consent practices are socially learned behaviors according to sex-
ual script theory [41, 58, 118], which can obfuscate realization that 
one is perpetrating or becoming victim of a nonconsensual act. 
For instance, sexual scripts can challenge sexual agency (one’s 
right to not give consent) through socially learned perceptions that 
women must oblige the sexual advances of a partner they are in a 
relationship with [30, 60] or that men always want sex and thus 
automatically consent [14, 58]. 
2.2  Computer-Mediated  Sexual  Activity  
Our study of computer-mediated consent follows a long history of 
research into computer-mediated sexual experience. It is nearing 
two decades since Bell, Blythe, and Sengers [16] pointed out the 
“elephant in the room” (p. 169) that was the absence of HCI research 
into pornography and sex. The feld of HCI has since witnessed 
several calls for research into sex [25, 64, 65] given its intersection 
with third wave topics such as social justice, embodiment, and 
intimacy [9]. 
Some of the ensuing research has considered how computers can 
support solo sexual experiences, such as through online pornogra-
phy [23, 136]. Computer-mediated sex toys have also been studied 
as forces for personal sexual health and wellness [9, 47, 48]. Sex 
robots have received attention as well, including study of sex dolls 
as precursive technology [34, 123], public perceptions of sex robots 
[111], and ethics of sex robot design [15, 50]. 
Computer-mediation of sexual experience between humans has 
been another research focus. Dating apps are well known facilita-
tors of sexual partner discovery [20, 21, 31, 140] and sexual risks [3] 
including HIV [54, 128, 129]. Additional work has studied dedicated 
technologies for sexual health such as a Condom Token Finder app 
[133], HIV-related digital resources [119], and a mobile phone game 
for sex education [134, 135]. Virtual worlds like Second Life have 
also been used for BDSM and fetish sex experiences [10–12], and 
sex-oriented social platforms like I Just Made Love [66, 67] have 
been found to foster discursive practices of sexual exhibitionism. 
Research into computer-mediated sexual experience has been used 
to demonstrate that technology not only enables fulfllment of 
preexisting sexual desire, but fosters novel forms of sexual experi-
ence and behavior [67]. Emerging research into computer-mediated consent to sex, which we unpack in the next subsection, provides 
another example of this through the impact of social computing 
technologies on how sexual partners understand consent. 
Other research has studied computer-mediated sexual violence, 
or nonconsensual sex. Social computing platforms are well known 
as enablers of online nonconsensual sexual acts such as sexting, 
unsolicited pornographic content, and sexual harassment [6, 55, 
105]. They also facilitate sexual violence in the physical world 
through sex trafcking [8] and cyber-grooming [78, 83] to coerce 
victims into physical sexual abuse [85]. Dating apps in particular 
have been repeatedly linked to sexual violence [1, 29, 45, 46, 100, 
107, 116]. 
There have been considerable eforts to design computer medi-
ated solutions to sexual violence. These include AI-based detection 
of sexual harm and predation on social media [106] as well as mo-
bile and wearable technologies to respond to sexual assault and 
harassment in urbans areas [2, 4, 22, 84, 86, 109, 110] including 
panic buttons [2, 58], GPS tracking [137], user reports of assault 
and harassment [2, 21], and safe routes [4, 108]. The roles of social 
media [5, 105] and conversational agents [70, 96] in support seek-
ing after sexual violence have also been studied. Yet despite (the 
absence of) consent being a defning characteristic of sexual vio-
lence, computer-mediated solutions that target consent exchange 
are relatively uncommon. 
2.3  Computer-Mediated  Consent  to  Sex  
Consent in general has become a popular HCI research lens [141] 
for topics such as collection of personal data [69, 71, 79, 91] and 
online research participation [52, 126, 138]. Regarding HCI research 
into consent to sex more specifcally, some work has considered how 
popular models for sexual consent could be applied to nonsexual 
human-computer interaction. Im and colleagues used afrmative 
consent as a lens for generating solutions to various problems with 
social platforms such as content feed curation, profle visibility, 
and content sharing [61]. Planned Parenthood’s FRIES model of 
sexual consent [95] has been used as a framing for “consentful 
technology” that gives individuals control over their personal data 
(or “digital bodies”) [72], and for designing embodied interactions 
with emerging technologies [122]. 
Research has also begun to explore consent exchange with sex 
robots. Strengers and colleagues [122] proposed design concepts 
aligned with the FRIES model such as programming sex robots 
with “safe words” to rapidly inform a human sexual partner to stop 
a nonconsensual act, “trafc lights” to visually indicate ongoing 
consent, and aftercare during which a sex robot can initiate con-
versation with the human partner about how the experience met 
expectations for consent exchange. Relatedly, it has been specu-
lated that the inability of voice assistants and sex robots to refuse 
consent to inappropriate commands or behavior from their users 
may subsequently foster harmful perceptions of sexual consent 
exchange between humans [121, 124]. 
Empirical evidence of computers shaping how people give and 
perceive to receive consent to sex can be best demonstrated through 
the online dating literature. Zytko and colleagues found that women 
and LGBTQ+ online daters repurpose Tinder’s interface as consent 
technology by establishing overt dialogue about consent throughCHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
profles and messaging interactions [139]. They found that Tinder 
also mediates consent exchange practices that are susceptible to 
sexual violence, such as how some male-identifying users infer 
and imply agreement to sex through Tinder’s interface without 
any confrmation of consent before physical sexual contact. Similar 
patterns of inferring interest in sex have been discovered across 
several dating apps [142]. Further, the perceived purpose of Tinder 
as an app for sex, coupled with the frequency of sexually objectify-
ing message content, has led some users to question their right to 
decline sexual advances [139] (p. 13). This parallels other research 
[75, 103] that has found dating apps to act as mass modelers of 
sexual scripts that perpetuate sexual objectifcation and challenge 
perceptions of sexual agency. 
The computer-mediation of consent exchange through dating 
apps is likely inadvertent by designers, however online daters have 
indicated a desire for more deliberate support of consent mediation, 
particularly to mitigate sexual harm [3, 42]. Likewise, researchers 
have also called for integration of consent exchange design patterns 
into social platforms to better accommodate the nuances between 
consensual and nonconsensual sexting [56]. 
To our knowledge there are few attempts to deliberately de-
sign for computer-mediated consent to sex between humans. One 
notable exception, Nguyen and Ruberg [90] highlight the emer-
gence of sexual “consent apps” such as LegalFling, We-Consent, 
and Good2Go, which collectively serve as a warning for how not 
to mediate consent to sex. These mobile apps exhibit a “checkbox” 
design pattern through which sex partners record their consent to 
a sexual act before it occurs. While this design pattern may reduce 
the chances of misinterpreting initial willingness to have sex, it has 
also received critique [90, 98] for restricting sexual agency by fail-
ing to accommodate users who may become uncomfortable during 
sex and wish to revoke consent. Nguyen and Ruberg suggest that 
sexual consent apps could be improved by drawing on design con-
cepts for computer-mediated consent exchange from video games 
through which players have sexual experiences with non-player 
characters [90]. Consent design concepts they discovered in games 
include: making consent exchange intentionally burdensome to en-
sure that a sexual partner has fully thought through their decision 
(e.g., by pressing and holding a button for several seconds), enabling 
consent withdrawal when one is no longer comfortable, having a 
discrete phase for negotiating sexual boundaries, and aftercare of 
one’s sexual partner to refect on the sexual experience together. 
While designs for intentionally mediating consent to sex are be-
ginning to proliferate the literature, they are conspicuously absent 
of stakeholder input. Anticipated users (people who would practice 
computer-mediated consent to sex) have seldom been involved in 
design [42]. 
3  METHOD  
We conducted an IRB-approved participatory design [89] study with 
17 online daters in the United States to generate new conceptual 
designs for sexual consent technology. Online dating was used as 
the backdrop in design sessions because of the normativity of using 
social computing platforms for discovering and interacting with po-
tential sexual partners, therefore posing ample opportunities across 
an online-to-ofine timeline for participants to consider consent Zytko and Furlo 
technology intervention. Participants were not required to incor-
porate dating apps in their designs, but rather propose technology 
to be used anywhere in an online-to-ofine timeline of discovering 
and interacting with sexual partners. Because we are using consent 
mediation as a lens towards sexual violence mitigation, we chose to 
recruit stakeholders who identifed as LGBTQ+ and/or women be-
cause these demographics are disproportionately victims of sexual 
violence [43, 82, 120]. 
3.1  Recruitment  
Recruitment of participants entailed members of the research team 
aligning with our target demographics raising awareness of the 
study through communities intersecting with their gender and 
sexual identities. Recruitment methods included posters at LGBTQ-
friendly establishments, a recruitment ad that was shared through 
social media, posts to Discord servers related to the LGBTQ+ com-
munity, emails to university clubs for women, and snowball sam-
pling. Recruitment materials described the study as involving design 
and creative refection on technology for consent to sex and clari-
fed that to qualify for the study one must self-identify as a woman 
and/or LGBTQ+ and have previously used a dating app (the latter 
to help ensure familiarity with, and receptiveness to, technology for 
augmenting sexual experience). Participants signed and returned 
digital consent forms before participating in design sessions. 
A total of 17 people participated across fve design sessions, 
with attendance in each session ranging from 2-5 people. Ratio-
nale for group sessions is provided in the next subsection. Par-
ticipants identifed as Caucasian (14), Vietnamese American (1), 
Asian (1), and African American (1). They identifed their gen-
ders as cisgender female (13), non-binary (2), genderqueer (1), and 
gender non-conforming (1). They identifed their sexualities as bi-
sexual/pansexual (9), heterosexual (5), demisexual/asexual (2), and 
lesbian (1). Ages ranged from 19 to 25, which is in line with the age 
range most susceptible to sexual violence [111], although partici-
pants were not directly asked if they self-identifed as victims of 
sexual violence. Participants were compensated with a $20 virtual 
gift card. 
3.2  Participant  Care  Precautions  
To inform best practices for broaching discussion of sexual consent 
and adjacent topics, the research team consulted with a certifed 
Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner (SANE) who has practiced with a 
community-based agency for more than nine years, which involves 
direct interaction with perpetrators and victims of sexual assault. 
We also consulted a Psychology researcher with a record of con-
ducting sexual violence research and other applicable university 
staf to understand our responsibilities as mandatory reporters of 
Title IX violations that participants may disclose. It was determined 
that experiences of sexual violence reported through the study were 
exempt from mandatory reporting. 
The moderator for each design session was a pansexual nonbi-
nary person to establish comfort with participants based on shared 
demographics. We had initially intended to conduct design sessions 
with participants individually due to the sensitive subject matter, 
however during pilot testing it was recommended that we allowOnline Dating as Context to Design Sexual Consent Technology with Women and LGBTQ+ Stakeholders CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
group sessions so that participants could have a social support struc-
ture of other people with shared gender demographics. We aforded 
both options in recruitment and all participants opted for group ses-
sions. Group sizes were based on predetermined session days/times 
that participants selected in the recruitment survey based on their 
availability. Participants used fake names to maintain their privacy 
although the possibility remained that their voice could be recog-
nized by others in their session, which was conveyed in the consent 
form and again at the start of each session. Session introductions 
also included ground rules from the moderator to maintain civility 
and respect; to this point participants included their pronouns next 
to their fake names to avoid misgendering. Lastly, participants were 
reminded during the study of the right to leave the session at any 
time if they were uncomfortable. 
3.3  Design  Session  Protocol  and  Data  Analysis  
Design sessions were conducted online over voice chat with screen 
and fle sharing in a private Discord server. Session lengths ranged 
from 75 to 150 minutes. After introductions and ground rules par-
ticipants described their preferred practices for exchanging consent 
in order to stimulate discussion of the consent practices that tech-
nology should mediate. As researchers we took an impartial stance 
on participants’ preferred consent practices, opting not to scafold 
design with afrmative consent or other established consent mod-
els because of their inconsistent adoption by the general public, 
amongst other critique [88], and thus risk of imposing a consent 
model onto participants that they may inwardly disagree with. 
Following elucidation of participant-preferred consent practices 
we showed a visual timeline of an “online dating process” to ex-
emplify the range of spatiotemporal intervention points for new 
consent technology. This process comprised: discovering a poten-
tial sexual partner online > interacting with the partner online 
> meeting the partner face-to-face > physical sexual activity oc-
curring. Participants worked in groups of 2-3 to design new ways 
that technology could support adoption of their consent practices 
anywhere in the timeline and with any device/application that they 
imagined. Designs varied between written, drawn, and verbal ideas. 
We purposely avoided giving participants particular situations of 
nonconsensual sex (sexual violence) to design for in order to avoid 
inadvertently labeling them as victims or perpetrators if they had 
comparable sexual experiences in their personal life. 
After the frst design exercise the whole group reconvened to 
share and discuss ideas, which involved modifcations and remixes 
of the original designs. Afterwards participants split into small 
groups again to generate a design for consent technology “10 years 
in the future” in order to inform long-term design agendas and 
remove creativity constraints around what participants may think 
is technologically possible. Sessions concluded with another group-
wide discussion. 
All Discord sessions were audio recorded and transcribed. A 
semantic approach to refexive thematic analysis [24] was applied 
to the transcripts to identify and refne emerging themes. A team of 
three researchers (a pansexual non-binary person, a heterosexual 
woman, and a heterosexual man) individually coded transcripts and 
then collectively reviewed coded transcripts in recurrent meetings 
to refne the evolving codebook. After multiple iterations of coding the transcripts the fnal codebook consisted of 60 codes, which the 
team collaboratively organized, along with a fourth, supervisory re-
searcher (heterosexual man), into patterns and themes through the 
web app Miro. Exemplary quotes in the next section are attributed 
to the fake names that participants provided. 
4  FINDINGS  
Participants introduced a variety of consent technology designs, 
some of which were features to be incorporated into dating apps 
while others were envisioned as separate applications or devices. 
Proposed technologies collectively supported a vision of sexual 
encounters (Figure 1) in which partners exchange unambiguous 
verbal consent to each sexual act (e.g., touching, kissing, penetra-
tion) and then continuously reconfrm verbal consent in case a 
partner becomes uncomfortable. Participants also envisioned con-
sent technology supporting candid discussions of sexual expecta-
tions across online and face-to-face interaction that precedes sexual 
activity. This was considered important for informing initial deci-
sions to have sex, and to normalize the occurrence of unambiguous 
verbal consent exchange. Topics comprising “sexual expectations” 
included specifc sexual activities, each partner’s preferred con-
sent exchange practices, and expectations around intimacy and 
monogamy. Given the emphasis on verbal consent exchange, pro-
posed designs were devoid of replacing how consent is actually 
given—in stark contrast to “consent apps” currently on the market. 
Figure 1: Designs for sexual consent technology sought to 
normalize unambiguous and recurrent consent exchange 
between partners, as well as transparent discourse about 
sexual expectations prior to sex. 
The word “comfort” was used deliberately and frequently by 
participants when describing their consent technology designs, re-
fecting a hesitance with forcing users into sexual dialogue against 
their will. An overarching theme behind their designs was a tar-
geting of comfort barriers: reasons why participants believed some 
people are not comfortable voluntarily discussing sexual expecta-
tions and consent despite the perceived benefts to safety. Coding 
elucidated three design themes around how consent technology 
could address these comfort barriers. We summarize these in Table 
1 and illustrate where they mediate consent exchange across online 
and face-to-face interaction in Table 2.CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Zytko and Furlo 
Table 1: A summary of design themes for mediating sexual consent 
Design Theme Comfort Barrier Addressed Example Design Concept 
Consent technology that initiates and maintains 
transparent dialogue about sex across online and 
ofine interaction Discomfort with personally broaching discussion 
of sexual expectations and consent Shared mobile device broaches a discussion topic 
about sex if two users are about to leave a bar for 
a private residence 
Consent exchange as interface design pattern to 
ensure mutual comfort with transparent discourse 
about sexual expectations Discomfort with abrupt transparency about sex Online dater “swipes” on a particular part of an-
other user’s profle to reveal content about sexual 
expectations 
Supplementing verbal consent with machine 
translation of latent sexual discomfort Hesitance to verbally disclose discomfort with a 
sexual act that one has already verbally consented 
to Biometric data about sexual discomfort sent to 
partner’s AR glasses, prompting them to stop the 
sexual activity and discuss consent with partner 
Table 2: Example implementations of design themes organized along an online-to-ofline process towards sex 
Discover sex partner online → Online interaction → Face-to-face meeting → Physical sexual activity 
Design theme 1: 
Consent technology that ini-
tiates and maintains trans-
parent dialogue about sex 
across online and ofine in-
teraction AI-mediated progression of 
messaging interaction to-
wards sexual expectations AI-mediated progression 
of interaction towards 
(updated) expectations for 
sex Shared mobile device 
broaches a discussion topic 
about sex if two users are 
about to leave a bar for a 
private residence 
Design theme 2: 
Consent exchange as inter-
face design pattern to ensure 
mutual comfort with trans-
parent discourse about sex-
ual expectations User gives consent to dating 
app befor viewing another 
user’s profle content about 
sexual expectations Partners give consent to un-
locking messaging channels 
about sex topics when com-
fortable User can “veto” AI-
prompted sex topics 
when uncomfortable 
Design theme 3: 
Supplementing verbal con-
sent with machine transla-
tion of sexual discomfort Smart watch detects discom-
fort during sex; alerts part-
ner to stop 
4.1  Design  Theme  1:  Consent  Technology  that  
Initiates  and  Maintains  Transparent  
Dialogue  About  Sex  Across  Online  and  
Ofline  Interaction  
“So pretty much I found through dating apps, like no one ever really 
talks about consent, or, uh, you know, talks about boundaries before 
they meet up. ” – Sarah 
Several proposed designs stemmed from the perceived rarity of 
discussion around sexual expectations prior to sex. Participants 
stressed the importance of discussing sexual expectations well be-
fore the moment sex is supposed to occur so they can navigate 
potential incompatibilities and dealbreakers without putting them-
selves at risk of sexual harm. With online dating in particular, multi-
ple participants referenced past experiences in which expectations 
for a face-to-face sexual encounter were vaguely mentioned on-
line and ultimately misunderstood upon meeting face-to-face. Yet 
participants also admitted discomfort with personally broaching 
discussion of sexual expectations, either online or in-person, due to 
prior experiences in which attempts were misinterpreted as firta-
tion or invitation to be sexually objectifed. Participants interested 
in same-gender partnerships also found these conversations to be 
rare due to confusion over which partner should take the initiative: 
“Like in, in my female relationships, it’s really hard to even have that kind of conversation because you don’t like traditionally know who’s 
gonna go frst. ” 
In response to discomfort with personally initiating these dis-
cussions, participants proposed design concepts that would put 
consent technology in charge of initiating and progressing trans-
parent dialogue about sexual expectations while being sensitive to 
users’ (dis)comfort. We present three variations of this design idea 
that span online and ofine interaction: 1) AI-mediated messaging 
prompts in dating apps to broach discussion of sexual expectations 
online, 2) AI-mediated transition of online interaction towards safe 
sexual encounters in the physical world or dissolution of online 
interaction when sexual expectations are incompatible, and 3) a 
shared mobile app “game” to be used during face-to-face meetings 
to maintain transparency in progression towards physical sexual 
activity. 
4.1.1 Comfort-Oriented Progression of Online Interaction Towards 
Discussion of Sex. Some proposed designs involved a dating app’s 
messaging interface mediating online interaction between two 
users by providing a series of conversation prompts that would 
gradually progress interaction towards talk of sexual expectations. 
The messaging interaction may start with “lighthearted” topics 
like shared hobbies and slowly escalate to more sensitive topics. 
Participants envisioned artifcial intelligence (AI) being used to 
analyze the course of messaging interaction to identify the rightOnline Dating as Context to Design Sexual Consent Technology with Women and LGBTQ+ Stakeholders CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
moments to introduce increasingly sensitive topics without impos-
ing discomfort. For instance, some suggested that the messaging 4.1.2 Comfort-Oriente d Interaction Dissolution and Transition to 
Face-to-Face Encounters. Increased transparency in sexual expec-
tations may elucidate incompatibility between potential sexual 
partners and thus the desire to discontinue interaction. Participants 
described dissolution of online interaction as extremely uncomfort-
able because of the unpredictability in how a partner may react; 
some mentioned past experiences of online harassment in retal-
iation for rejection. Accordingly, they considered it essential for 
AI-mediated interaction progression to also manage dissolution of 
interaction. Design examples focused on the moment in which an 
invitation for face-to-face meeting is broached, which was consid-
ered a point of no return because it introduces the risk of physical 
sexual harm. 
Ideas that emerged in discussion amongst participants involved 
the AI identifying or collecting reasons for a disconnect in desire to 
meet face-to-face and reporting those in the interface. This would 
alleviate the burden of users having to personally provide—and 
defend—their rationale. Sarah gave an example of the AI reacting 
to two partners giving diferent answers about their desire to meet 
face-to-face: “There could be like a little prompt [. . . ] like, would you 
want to meet in person? And then like, if you [have diferent answers 
to that question], like maybe it could say, like, pop up, be like, hey, 
you guys have diferent expectations. ” 
Others were uncomfortable with sending any message that indi-
cates an unwillingness to meet face-to-face because it could incur 
harassment by a messaging partner. In response to this discom-
fort there was one suggested design that several participants liked, 
which involved users covertly triggering AI-mediated interaction 
dissolution with message responses that have a double meaning. 
Emma drew an interface example (Figure 3) in which the user can 
covertly tell the AI that they no longer want to continue interaction 
with the message “Yeah, we could meet up,” which would trigger 
an end to the messaging chat. interface could position serious or potentially uncomfortable topics 
like consent practices after humorous topics so that laughter may 
ease two messaging partners into a more serious conversation. 
Some participants wanted to instruct the AI on “how” progres-
sion of online interaction should be mediated. As Pablo described: 
“It’d be nice if the app just straight up told you like, how do you want 
to talk about anything? [...] And that’d be cool if it then gave you 
usable ways to do that. ” One of the more popular ideas for inform-
ing AI-based conversation progression involved a repurposing of 
online dating profle pages into private instruction manuals for the 
AI that were described as virtual “Want-Will-Won’t” lists. Want-
Will-Won’t (WWW) lists have historically been promoted by the 
LGBTQ+ community to establish sexual preferences [114] with 
three categories: what the person wants to do during sex, what 
they are willing to do during sex, and what they won’t do during 
sex. Participants described these lists being broadened to also in-
clude tangential topics like preferences around cuddling, displays of 
afection, and monogamy. While WWW lists could presumably be 
visible to other online daters on one’s profle page too, participants 
were skeptical that the average user reads text content on profles 
closely (“I feel like a lot of the thing with the profle stage, and like 
people on dating apps, is they look at the pictures and they swipe 
a direction” – Sabrina). Incorporating WWW content as prompts 
in online interaction was considered a way to better ensure that 
potential sexual partners would become aware of them. 
Figure 2: One variation of AI-mediated messaging interfaces 
involved users selecting from multiple conversation prompt 
options to control the progression towards more sensitive 
topics around sex. 
Sophia illustrated an approach to user-AI collaboration in which 
the messaging interface broaches topics of varying levels of sensi-
tivity, with users being able to select one and therefore the pace 
of progressive sensitivity. She explained: “You could have like the 
categories of conversation starters. So ones that are like lighthearted, 
ones that are a little bit more suggestive, and then ones that are like 
explicit, and that could get into kind of like [more specifc sexual de-
sires], especially if you were looking for something that is not vanilla 
[vanilla in this instance refers to relatively common sexual acts]. ” 
Figure 3: Emma’s design for avoiding discomfort with inter-
action dissolution involved messages that covertly trigger 
the dating app to close a messaging conversation. 
4.1.3 Mediating Face-to-Face Interaction for Transparency in Up-
dated Sexual Expectations and Escalation to Sex. Participants ex-
pected consent technology to mediate progression of face-to-face 
interaction as well, to ensure transparency of sexual expectations 
but also mutual comfort with moving to a private location where 
sex can occur. This was considered particularly valuable when time 
has elapsed between online and face-to-face interaction due to mis-
cellaneous life events that could alter desire for sex and, in online 
dating contexts, the possibility of physical appearance not match-
ing profle pictures. Participants envisioned sexual partners using 
one mobile device to answer or trade prompts with one another.CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
As one group described: “Yeah, something that you can have like on 
your phone, you can put it on the table. And then both of you just 
look at it and see and talk about it or switch the phones and always 
one question than the other question. ” 
This single-device mediation of face-to-face interaction was con-
ceptualized as a “game” that seeks to keep interaction fun while 
also maintaining transparency in sexual dialogue. The game would 
motivate voluntary use through “unpredictable” insertion of hu-
morous prompts for sheer enjoyment amongst more serious or 
potentially “awkward” topics pertinent to sex. As one example of 
a humorous prompt: “You would have like questions that are goofy, 
like, what’s the most embarrassing moment of your life? You know, 
like, questions that would inspire laughter.” Sabrina compared the 
strategy of alternating serious and humorous prompts to one she 
had manually tried to employ on dates: 
“I think it’s like a really, like, great accessible game, right. Like, I 
feel like girls kind of already do that, like, in their head before. [. . . ] 
Defnitely in my head I’m like, okay, what are questions that I could, 
like, potentially bring up [to gradually progress the conversation 
towards sexual expectations]? Like, if the conversation was, like, just 
like, have conversation starters in the frst place, I think you can never 
go wrong with it, especially if, like, if it’s more of like, a random thing. 
And then you also have consent questions in there. You know, like, it 
would be more of like, something to laugh about, but also to have like, 
those deep conversations. ” 
A key moment on dates, aside from the actual exchange of con-
sent to a sex, is a transfer of location from a public to private space 
for sex to occur, during which individuals lose structural protections 
against sexual violence such as bystander availability. Participants 
expected the shared-device game to mediate this key moment with 
conversation prompts to ensure mutual comfort with escalation to 
a private location or, alternatively, to navigate an amicable depar-
ture. In Susan’s words: “I think that I’m also like, in the meet, like, 
those questions should also like kind of entail like [. . . ] a way to see if, 
like, the date’s gonna continue going on further too. Because like, I 
think that’s a huge major part of like, the positive consensual sexual 
experiences. Like, are we going to leave here [the public date location] 
together afterwards?” 
4.2  Design  Theme  2:  Consent  Exchange  as  
Interface  Design  Pattern  to  Ensure  Mutual  
Comfort  With  Transparent  Discourse  About  
Sexual  Expectations  
“What I’m not okay with, I had a person that [. . . ] would not stop 
talking about stufng a drum stick up his ass. And I’m like, oh my 
goodness. ” – Amy 
Participants wanted consent technologies that could facilitate 
normativity in discussions of sexual expectations, however they 
were sensitive to proposing designs that may usurp user agency in 
how and when sexual expectations are disclosed. They were con-
cerned that discomfort from being asked to discuss sexual expecta-
tions too soon, or being abruptly informed of another user’s sexual 
expectations, may inadvertently amplify resistance to such trans-
parency. In reaction to these concerns some participants sought to 
integrate consent exchange as an interface design pattern to ensure Zytko and Furlo 
that users are comfortable with, or consenting to, the disclosure of 
sexual expectations with a given partner. 
Participants drew inspiration from Tinder’s “swiping feature” 
that—perhaps inadvertently—serves as a design exemplar for con-
sent exchange by requiring two users to mutually swipe on each 
other’s profles to enable messaging interaction. Ideas from partic-
ipants involved extending a consent exchange design pattern to 
moments in dating apps and other standalone consent technologies 
that would directly precede transparency in sexual expectations. 
Two ideas included applying consent exchange to viewing and 
disclosing portions of online dating profles regarding sexual expec-
tations as well as initiating discussion of individual conversation 
topics online and in-person pertinent to sex. 
4.2.1 Consent Exchange to Disclosure of Online Dating Profile Con-
tent About Sex. Some participants advocated for online dating pro-
fle designs that included nuanced information about sexual ex-
pectations, such as “BDSM tests” and a “sexual level spectrum bar” 
which would collectively convey detailed information about one’s 
sexual desires. Yet other participants, refecting on their own on-
line dating experiences, remarked that content on profles about 
sexual expectations can be “jarring” and even outside of their own 
“comfort level. ” At least one participant admitted to rejecting a po-
tential sexual partner for being too graphic about sexual interests 
in their profle. To rectify the tension between desires to express 
sexual expectations on profles and potential discomfort that such 
disclosure could cause, participants suggested partitioning a profle 
into distinct sections, or creating separate versions of profle pages, 
that would require consent exchange before sexual expectations 
can be disclosed to a given profle viewer. Michelle captured these 
two ideas: 
“We wanted like parts of profles to be locked, maybe just general 
bio information and like two or three pictures or something. And then 
if someone wants to see more, they have to send out a request, and 
they need permission from whoever’s account it is, like, do you want 
this person to view your [sexual information]?” 
Regarding the multiple profle idea: “We mentioned having multi-
ple kinds of profles [referring to conversation with other participants 
in the design session]. So if you have a, like, ‘I’m looking for friends’ 
profle, or looking for dates, or looking for sex. For each one of those, 
same deal, you need permission to view those. ” 
4.2.2 Consent Exchange to Online Interaction “Channels” About Sex. 
Some participants proposed partitioning online interaction in dat-
ing apps and other messaging platforms into distinct conversation 
topics that are consented to one-by-one. One idea that garnered 
support from several participants was a “channel” -based messaging 
interface in which conversation topics are organized into channels 
or “tabs” that serve as a “checklist” of topics that should or could 
be discussed leading up to a face-to-face meeting. The channels 
would include consent practices and sexual boundaries but also 
more mundane topics and those of personal interest to the user. 
Each partner in a messaging interaction would have their own se-
ries of channels, and they would “unlock” a given channel during 
online interaction to express consent or comfort with discussing it. 
Per Kat: “You start messaging said person, like, you’ll see like your 
tabs, and you’ll see if they’re, like, locked or unlocked. [. . . ] And inOnline Dating as Context to Design Sexual Consent Technology with Women and LGBTQ+ Stakeholders CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
that case, it’s one person’s prerogative to unlock theirs, like when 
they’re comfortable with it. ” 
Upon unlocking a channel, one’s interaction partner can express 
their own consent to the topic through initiating conversation in 
the channel: “. . . that also ensures that, like, you know that conversa-
tions are consensual because the person reading that can look at that 
[unlocked channel] and say, like, I don’t really want to talk about that, 
and then just not message you [in that channel]. But you know that if 
someone does message you about it, like, they also want to talk about 
that. [...] So it kind of can ensure that like, your initial conversation 
with them [about sex] is like a mutual and consensual one. ” 
4.2.3 Consent Exchange to Progression of AI-Mediated Discourse 
About Sex Across Online and Ofline Interaction. Consent as an 
interface design pattern was also imagined as being integrated 
into other technologies proposed by participants. While they were 
receptive to AI posing conversation prompts to progress interaction 
towards transparency of sexual expectations online and ofine (see 
section 4.1), there was also persistent concern that the AI could get 
the pace of progression wrong and impose discomfort rather than 
transparency onto users. 
Participants considered several interface metaphors for incor-
porating explicit consent exchange into AI-mediated conversation 
progression to give users the opportunity to confrm comfort with 
an upcoming conversation prompt. For messaging interaction, par-
ticipants favored metaphors to express discomfort, such as “red 
cards” (borrowed from football/soccer) and a more literal copy of 
the “swiping” mechanism from Tinder that would allow users to 
decline a potential prompt from being formally broached in the 
messaging interface. 
“If it was like, more of like a swiping feature, like the questions that 
you don’t want to answer, you can just swipe away from. ” – Sabrina 
Participants also considered ways to support consent exchange 
to conversation prompts from a shared device during face-to-face 
interaction so that users could avoid prompts of a sexual nature 
if they are “having a bad date experience and don’t really want to 
talk about explicit stuf. ” While some of the aforementioned design 
metaphors could apply in-person, participants also considered de-
sign patterns that accommodated partners using a shared mobile 
device for conversation prompts. An example was a “two-factor 
identifcation type thing” in which partners would use their indi-
vidual mobile devices to privately express consent to upcoming 
prompts before they are broached on whichever device of the two 
they are using for shared prompts. 
4.3  Design  Theme  3:  Supplementing  Verbal  
Consent  with  Machine  Translation  of  Sexual  
Discomfort  
“If you can tell that someone is physically uncomfortable, but their 
[consent] language does not match that, you should stop what’s hap-
pening. ” – Tabasco 
Perhaps the most obvious intervention point for consent tech-
nology is when sex is about to occur, and several participants did 
propose designs for this stage. These designs predominantly fo-
cused on a distinction between verbal consent to sex and nonverbal 
signals of discomfort with sex. Participants described past instances in which a sexual partner gave verbal consent to a sexual activity 
while simultaneously conveying body language of discomfort that 
seemed to confict with the verbal consent. In these situations they 
cast doubt on the validity of verbal consent and stopped the sex-
ual activity, usually followed by conversation about the unspoken 
signals of discomfort. 
“I feel like body language is something you should pay attention to. 
Because if you can clearly tell like, okay, they’re not into this, or this 
is something that they seem very uncomfortable with, like, getting 
that confrmation from them, like, hey, are you okay with this? Or 
like, oh I noticed you’re kind of uncomfortable. We totally don’t have 
to do this. I feel like that’s something that should be like, like, as well 
as verbal consent, someone’s body language, you should be paying 
attention to that. ” – Pablo 
A few participants ofered reasons why their past sexual partners 
gave verbal consent to a sexual activity that they were not actually 
comfortable with. Uncertainty around how partners may react 
to rejection was mentioned. Perceived obligations to engage in a 
sexual act due to time spent with a partner was another reason. 
Susan acknowledged these feelings impacting her own decisions to 
continue sex that she was uncomfortable with: “I defnitely agree 
that there’s defnitely a safety and a guilt issue too, mainly with 
women and heterosexual relationships, especially. And I’ve defnitely 
felt that myself as well. Mhm. ” 
A consent technology design that was proposed to address this 
consent/comfort confict involved machine translation of ambigu-
ous or latent signals of sexual discomfort into explicit visual or 
auditory information directly before, or during, a sexual act. No-
tably, machine translation of sexual discomfort would not be a 
replacement for verbal consent exchange, but a supplement to ver-
bal consent. 
Sexual comfort translation was pitched by participants as a tool 
for protection of their sexual partners more so than themselves. 
Receiving machine-detected signals of discomfort from an other-
wise verbally-consenting partner would enable them to stop their 
own inadvertent perpetration of a truly nonconsensual act and the 
ensuing trauma. The idea received particularly strong reception 
from participants who doubted their natural abilities to detect so-
cial cues around sex. For example, one participant identifying as 
neurodivergent described struggles with detecting the true feelings 
of sexual partners across online and face-to-face interaction. 
4.3.1 Anticipated Technologies for Detection and Conveyance of 
Discomfort with Physical Sexual Activity. Technologies that partic-
ipants incorporated into their sketches and verbal concepts for 
sexual discomfort detection included “wearable tech” such as smart 
watches that collect biometric information and augmented real-
ity (AR) glasses for conveying comfort indicators to one’s part-
ner. More futuristic technologies like comfort detection robots and 
brain-computer interfaces were also mentioned. 
Participants sometimes used pop culture characters to person-
ify and relate their ideas to other participants in design sessions. 
For instance, Jo drew a picture of the Disney robot Baymax to 
demonstrate their idea for a discomfort-detecting robot that ex-
hibits friendliness and a desire to “help” sexual partners have a 
mutually pleasurable experience (Figure 4). Susan described a sce-
nario in which a “Sherlock Holmes” -like robot would be continuallyCHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
sensing body language, but only alerting one’s partner through 
AR-equipped smart glasses in moments of discomfort. 
“Well, I’d hoped that they could, like, read people, like almost like 
a Sherlock Holmes inside of a little robot, like, reading body language 
better than I could. Or, and then like, somehow, it’s like, like, mash 
it with the wearable tech. And somehow, like, I’m like alerted like 
whether I’m wearing glasses or like a watch. Like, I’m alerted when it 
has like a scan [of discomfort]. ” 
Figure 4: Some participants used relatable pop culture refer-
ences to convey their ideas for consent technology, such as a 
Baymax-inspired robot that detects sexual discomfort. 
Participants spent time discussing technologies best suited for 
rapid transmission of sexual discomfort information (Figure 5) be-
cause timely awareness of discomfort can mean the diference be-
tween perpetration and prevention of nonconsensual sex. They 
expected that sexual partners would likely be too distracted to no-
tice traditional mobile app notifcations if they are actively engaged 
in a sexual act and so they considered wearable technologies that 
can instantly grab attention through audio or visual alerts like smart 
watches that would prompt its wearer to immediately stop the sex-
ual activity. Sophia’s group gave an example in which a partner 
has consented to physical contact and a brain-computer interface 
conveys a bright red light when the partner becomes uncomfortable 
with their body being touched. 
“If something is occurring on or near your body that is good, and 
you want to keep that going, like that could be a green light, so to 
speak. Whereas if something’s not feeling good, or you want to stop, 
that could really like give a fashing signal to the person. ” – Sophia 
4.3.2 Managing Trade-Ofs With User Control Over Expression of 
Sexual Comfort. Participants did recognize a trade-of with user 
agency that would come with machine translation of sexual comfort: 
sexual partners would lose at least some control over when and how 
information about sexual comfort is expressed to a potential partner. 
Some participants vocalized concern with one’s mind becoming 
completely transparent to a sexual partner, and they advocated for 
retaining some agency or “mystery” with internal dialogue. For Zytko and Furlo 
Figure 5: Participants considered ways to rapidly alert users 
of sexual discomfort so they can immediately alter their be-
havior. Visual and auditory cues on smart watches (left) gar-
nered support, as did visual cues through a brain-computer 
interface for informing users when their sexual partner is no 
longer comfortable with an ongoing sexual activity (right). 
example, Jo said: “I don’t want to know every detail how he’s feeling, 
how just everything would, that would be too much for me personally. 
If he’s feeling in the mood, or just like, how, how he has a person [that 
always knows] what he’s thinking, I’m kind of like, I still, I would still 
want him to have mystery. So I wouldn’t want to go too much. ” 
To address these agency concerns participants wanted machine 
translation to be limited only to “explicitly sexual contexts,” such 
as when two partners are in a private location where sex could 
occur. They also made a point to distinguish the wealth of data that 
could be potentially collected about users and the relatively narrow 
information about discomfort that would eventually be conveyed 
to one’s partner. 
Participants debated the notion of “discrete” translation—having 
the ability to receive indicators of a partner’s sexual comfort level 
without their awareness. Reasoning behind a desire for discrete 
translation was to ensure that the mere presence of the technology 
did not cause oneself or one’s sexual partner to act unnaturally (“I 
don’t think that I’d want to be aware of the other person having it. 
Oh, you know what? I don’t think like, I don’t think I’d want it to be 
super obvious that I’m doing it as well. ” ). 
Devices for discrete translation were referred to as a “lie detector” 
and “bullshit radar. ” While these terms may read as distrustful, they 
were intended to refect specifc use cases in which one’s sexual 
partner verbally lies about being comfortable with a sexual act or 
being sexually attracted to the user possessing the lie detector. This 
was particularly relevant when one’s sexual partner identifes as 
a man because of gendered sexual scripts that men should always 
desire sex and are therefore acting outside of their gender role if 
they forego a sexual opportunity. Woman-identifying participants 
envisioned a “secretive” device being embedded in women’s clothing 
such as earrings and necklaces to inform them only when a man is 
not being truthful about their sexual attraction or willingness to 
engage in a sexual act. 
5  DISCUSSION  
Technology for mediating sexual experience has existed for decades, 
since at least the 1910s going by the Sears Roebuck catalog [25]Online Dating as Context to Design Sexual Consent Technology with Women and LGBTQ+ Stakeholders CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
(p. 1696), and yet the mediation of consent exchange between sex-
ual partners has been largely overlooked as a deliberate design 
focus. Recent literature has begun to introduce design concepts for 
computer-mediated consent to sex from mobile consent apps [98] 
to video games [90] and even sex robots [122]. To our knowledge 
this study is the frst to produce empirical knowledge about how 
anticipated users, particularly women and LGBTQ+ stakeholders, 
would want sexual consent technology to be designed. 
Beyond the individual technology ideas proposed by our par-
ticipants—which vary in immediate practicality—it is important 
to examine the bigger picture behind what they wanted consent 
technology to do and how this might inform future research. In 
this section we frst elucidate three design guidelines for sexual 
consent technology based on our research and use them to compare 
other designs for consent technology in the literature. We conclude 
the section with methodological refections: a retrospective on key 
decisions in our participatory design protocol that can help future 
researchers incorporate marginalized stakeholders in the design of 
technology for consent, sex, and sexual violence mitigation that is 
sensitive to unintended consequences of participation. 
5.1  Design  Guideline  1:  Consent  Technology  
Should  Normalize,  Not  Replace,  Verbal  
Exchange  of  Consent  
Two approaches to sexual consent technology design become ap-
parent across our study and prior related work: 1) technology that 
sexual partners give consent to/through, and 2) technology that 
seeks to normalize candid discussion of sex and exchange of con-
sent directly between partners. According to our study the latter 
is clearly preferred by anticipated users identifying as women or 
LGBTQ+. 
The frst category, technology that sexual partners give consent 
through, is exemplifed by the “checkbox” model: a one-time provi-
sion of consent that sexual partners record in apps like LegalFling, 
We-Consent, and Good2Go. This design pattern has already re-
ceived critique [90, 98], and our study provides further evidence 
against this design. It does not support withdrawal of consent if 
one becomes uncomfortable, nor does it allow for nuanced dialogue 
and agreement regarding progression of individual sexual acts, 
which were important considerations to our participants. Another 
example is technology that makes consent exchange intentionally 
burdensome (e.g., holding down a button for several seconds to 
convey consent), which has received praise from Nguyen and Ru-
berg [90] for demonstrating “a model of designing consent in which 
consent cannot be given without deliberate thought, efort, and 
time on the part of the user” (p. 6). But as pointed out by our partic-
ipants, transparent dialogue about sex and consent is already rare 
and a theme across their design concepts was to make adoption of 
transparent sexual dialogue easier. 
There was a conspicuous absence of consent technology designs Our participants viewed consent as a process, not a single event. 
This aligns with “mental state” theories describing consent as an 
ongoing negotiation [19]. Conceptualizing consent as a process pro-
vides expanded opportunities for consent to be computer-mediated 
beyond the moment when physical sexual contact is about to occur. 
Our participants illustrated this with consent technology concepts 
that intervene across online and face-to-face interaction, such as 
AI-mediated dialogue about sexual expectations while partners 
are communicating through a dating app or during face-to-face from our
 participants targeting how people actually give consent to 
each other; they wanted the act of giving consent to remain a direct 
verbal exchange. We conclude that consent technology should not 
try to directly mediate the act of giving consent at all, but to reduce 
barriers to direct verbal exchange of consent. The following two 
guidelines provide avenues towards this type of mediation. 5.2  Design  Guideline  2:  Afrmative  Consent  
Technology  Should  Prioritize  Comfort  
Afrmative consent is a model for sexual consent exchange that is 
advocated by public health organizations and scholars—including 
in HCI [122]—due to its potential to mitigate sexual violence (see 
section 2.1 for a review). Our participants did not explicitly use the 
term “afrmative consent” however there are signifcant parallels 
with the consent exchange practices and considerations underly-
ing their consent technology designs. Most notable are the unam-
biguous verbal exchange of agreement to sex to reduce chances 
of misinterpreting consent, the notions of ongoing and revocable 
consent during a sexual act, and the sensitivity to inadvertently 
coercing a partner into sex (freely given consent). These fndings 
provide support for other consent technology designs founded on 
afrmative consent (e.g., sex robot interactions [122]). They also 
suggest potential for consent technology to increase adoption of 
afrmative consent (under-adoption has historically been an issue, 
fueling criticism that the model is unrealistic [88]). 
Yet comfort was also a recurring theme in participants’ designs, 
refecting a hesitance to force users into practices that align with 
afrmative consent principles, most notably ongoing transparent di-
alogue about sex which is critical for informed consent. For instance, 
users would be able to “opt out” of conversation about sexual topics 
or observation of sex-related information online that the proposed 
consent technologies would otherwise encourage. The motivation 
behind this comfort prioritization was to avoid immediately re-
pelling users who are not accustomed to discussing sex openly. In 
order to sustain user adoption, especially users unaccustomed to 
afrmative consent practices, we recommend that future consent 
technologies similarly prioritize comfort and retain user agency in 
how, when, or if consent is mediated. 
Interestingly, proposed designs around machine translation of 
sexual discomfort in face-to-face settings appear to confict with 
the user agency that is pervasive across their other ideas. Partic-
ipants justifed the automatic transmission of sexual discomfort 
with urgent need of such information to ensure that they do not in-
advertently pressure their partner into sex. Yet one may feel sexual 
discomfort for various reasons; they may not want to share these 
feelings if they do not consider them germane to their consent 
and as such we cannot recommend this particular design concept. 
Future work could explore how to develop comfort with voluntary 
adoption of all facets of afrmative consent, including voluntary 
expression of sexual discomfort during physical sex acts. 
5.3  Design  Guideline  3:  Consent  Technology  
Should  Intervene  Before  Situations  Where  
Sex  OccursCHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
dates in public locations. These pre-sex intervention points could 
be key to normalizing patterns of overt dialogue about sexual ex-
pectations and consent, which is crucial to afrmative consent 
principles like informed consent, enthusiastic consent, and consent 
to specifc sexual acts. Participants also expressed that having such 
dialogue online could help them rule out potential dates who ex-
press problematic or conficting views on consent before meeting 
them face-to-face. 
While our participants routinely designed for intervention prior 
to sex occurring, there are surely other intervention points that can 
be explored. Consent exchange designs discovered in the games 
HUGPUNX and Hurt Me Plenty [90], and envisioned for sex robot 
interactions per Strengers’ TEASE process [122], frame the after-
math of sex as furtive design territory. For instance, Hurt Me Plenty 
incorporates an “aftercare” phase for a player’s partner in BDSM 
roleplay (a non-player character) to refect on how well the player 
recognized and abided by the character’s comfort or discomfort 
with the sexual experience. Post-sex interaction could be important 
for informing future sexual encounters between the same partners 
and establishing patterns of harm-mitigative consent practices and 
is thus a prime target for further research into consent technology 
design. We recommend that future research and design of sexual 
consent technology consider the full breadth of intervention points 
across online and face-to-face contexts. 
5.4  Refections  on  Method:  Involving  
Marginalized  Stakeholders  in  Design  of  
Sexual  Consent  Technology  
While the HCI community often puts a spotlight on the unintended 
consequences of emerging technologies, there can also be unin-
tended consequences of the methods used to produce those tech-
nologies. This is particularly true for research and design meth-
ods that involve direct interaction with marginalized stakeholders 
around sensitive—and at times traumatic—topics such as consent 
and sexual violence. Might the act of participation itself be trau-
matic, distressing, or negatively impactful on one’s future sexual 
encounters? In this subsection we ofer a retrospective on key de-
cision points in our participatory design process and in doing so 
ofer methodological suggestions for future user-centered research 
of technology for consent to sex and adjacent sexual topics. 
5.4.1 Which Sexual Situations Should Stakeholders Design For? A 
decision made towards participant wellbeing was to allow partici-
pants to determine for themselves which sexual situations neces-
sitate consent technology intervention, as opposed to broaching 
researcher-selected sexual situations that encompass an exhaustive 
range of sexual violence occurrences. A drawback of our decision 
was the possibility of participants overlooking critical situations in 
which nonconsensual sex could occur, or in other words designing 
for a rather narrow range of sex contexts, leaving questions as to 
if or how proposed designs may apply to unacknowledged forms 
of sexual violence. Nonetheless, we considered the advantages for 
participant care to outweigh this drawback. 
During preparatory interactions with sexual violence experts 
we learned of the great lengths they go through to probe specifc 
sexual situations with extremely precise wording to avoid victim Zytko and Furlo 
blaming and re-traumatization. We opted to avoid broaching spe-
cifc sexual situations in design workshops, which involve ample 
impromptu dialogue, in order to sidestep these dangers. In retro-
spect this decision had other benefts. Participants were able to 
discuss scenarios for consent technology with signifcant nuance 
because they had personally lived them (something we could not 
guarantee with preidentifed situations). Another unanticipated, 
but welcomed, outcome was participants’ focus on positive sexual 
experiences and how consent technology could enrich them, re-
minding us that consent technology should lead not only to the 
absence of sexual violence, but the presence of mutually gratifying 
sexual experience. 
For future work we advocate for participant-driven identifca-
tion of sexual situations for design in light of the above reasons. 
However, we do recognize the possible need of introducing spe-
cifc sexual violence situations to produce truly inclusive consent 
technology. In such cases we urge following best practices from 
public health and psychology when introducing these situations to 
participants, such as using objective, behaviorally specifc wording 
that avoids victim and perpetrator labeling (see the sexual expe-
riences survey for example [125]), or directly involving a sexual 
assault nurse examiner (SANE) or equivalent practitioner in design 
sessions. 
5.4.2 Should Stakeholders Design for a Particular Consent Model? 
The absence of a consent model to scafold design sessions was 
another important methodological decision—stakeholders instead 
designed according to their own preferred consent practices. Intro-
ducing and encouraging design for a specifc consent model would 
have had its benefts like honing attention to latent facets of con-
sent exchange that participants may not have naturally considered 
like an aftercare phase [122]. On the other hand, scafolding design 
with a consent model would risk alienating stakeholders who may 
inwardly disagree with the it (a concern for afrmative consent 
given inconsistent public adoption), raising questions of whether 
resultant designs would truly refect a stakeholder’s vision of con-
sent technology. Applying a consent model may also inadvertently 
label stakeholders as victims or perpetrators of sexual violence. For 
example, an afrmative consent scafolding may imply to stakehold-
ers that they did something wrong if they did not verbally exchange 
consent in a previous sexual experience. 
We do not recommend always scafolding design with stakeholder-
preferred consent practices. This may not be appropriate with stake-
holder groups at disproportionate risk of perpetration, such as 
cisgender men, given a history of adopting problematic consent 
practices that perpetuate gender bias and restrict sexual agency. Yet 
the choice to forgo a consent theory for our demographic of women 
and LGBTQ+ stakeholders, who are disproportionately victims of 
sexual violence, does appear justifed in retrospect. Participants 
focused on intervention points that may not have been obvious if 
using an afrmative consent model, such as communication about 
consent practices themselves and the consent/comfort distinction. 
They also had minor nuances in their preferred consent practices, 
some of which may not have been communicated had participants 
felt they did not align with a proposed model. Perhaps most impor-
tantly, participants’ consent technology designs did largely align 
with afrmative consent, but had afrmative consent been usedOnline Dating as Context to Design Sexual Consent Technology with Women and LGBTQ+ Stakeholders CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
to scafold design from the beginning this voluntary gravitation 
towards afrmative consent-minded technology would not have 
been discovered. 
5.4.3 How Do We Protect and Care for Stakeholders In-Session? Var-
ious precautions were taken for participant wellbeing during design 
sessions, starting with the choice to conduct sessions online due 
to COVID-19. Participants had fakes names for privacy, pronouns 
attached to their fake names to avoid misgendering, a moderator 
that similarly identifed with a marginalized group, ground rules to 
maintain civility, and a reminder of the right to discontinue partici-
pation at any time (in the consent form and verbally in-session). 
No signs of distress were detected by researchers or expressed by 
participants, yet this does not mean distress was completely avoided. 
Upon refection we did not ofer clear avenues or structures for 
expressing discomfort or decisions to discontinue participation. 
Here we distinguish simply having communication channels with 
researchers (e.g., email, direct messages in Discord—which were 
available) from formally announcing procedures for using those com-
munication channels. In retrospect too much of an onus was put on 
participants to fgure out “what to do” in situations of discomfort, 
including after the design session when discomfort may linger or 
cause one to redefne a previously unacknowledged incident of 
sexual harm. For our own future research, and that of others inter-
secting with computer-mediated consent and sexual violence, we 
recommend 1) clarifying formal avenues for expressing discomfort 
during and after participation, and 2) providing all participants with 
post-study resources such as sexual violence survivor hotlines. 
5.4.4 How Can We Be More Intentional With Stakeholder Recruit-
ment? For our study we broadly sought participation from dating 
app users who identify as women and/or LGBTQ+ because these 
demographics are at elevated risk of dating app-facilitated sexual 
violence. We found this relatively broad inclusion criteria to be valu-
able for encouraging participation of diverse voices in design, and a 
likely reason for the diversity in consent technology concepts that 
our study produced. However, there are benefts to more granular 
or intentional recruitment approaches that went unrealized in our 
study, and which have motivated our rethinking of intentionality 
in participant screening for future work. 
For one, screening for more specifc demographics can enable 
researchers to better anticipate stakeholder needs and sensitivities, 
and provide associated resources. For example, limiting inclusion 
to self-identifed sexual violence victims for some design sessions 
or activities could enable researchers to better prepare victim sup-
port services and contacts, or perhaps recruit a provider of victim 
services to attend the design activities. 
Furthermore, recruitment of secondary stakeholders—commonly 
called proxies [32, 53]—with intimate knowledge of consent and 
sexual violence could lend unique perspectives on consent tech-
nology without unnecessarily re-exposing primary stakeholders 
to trauma. Whereas therapists and family members have been in-
corporated as proxies in participatory design of technologies for 
sensitive populations like children [53, 76] and people with demen-
tia [32], applicable proxies for consent technology may include 
those who have regular interactions with sexual violence victims 
such as sexual assault nurse examiners (SANEs), sexual violence 
shelter workers, and support hotline workers. We can also consider the specifc research questions that can be 
explored through deliberate recruitment of proxies. Findings from 
the present study suggest that afrmative consent principles should 
be incorporated into sexual consent technology, yet afrmative con-
sent has received critique for its practicality in the real world [ 88]. 
Exploring nuanced questions around the feasibility of afrmative 
consent-based technologies, relative to other models or practices 
of consent, may be difcult with a generalized sample that has 
inconsistent knowledge of afrmative consent. Intentional recruit-
ment of consent experts would be better suited to such exploration, 
including sexual assault nurse examiners (SANEs) as mentioned 
earlier as well as sex education professionals and advocates who 
regularly teach and hear reactions to afrmative consent principles. 
6  CONCLUSION  
We conducted a participatory design study with 17 United States-
based women and LGBTQ+ stakeholders—demographics at dispro-
portionate risk of sexual violence—about how technology should 
be designed to mediate consent to sex. Their designs for mediating 
consent introduced new approaches for dating apps and associated 
technologies like wearable devices and social robots dedicated to 
ensuring mutually consensual experiences. In contrast to controver-
sial “consent apps” currently on the market, the purview of consent 
mediation in the eyes of our participants goes well beyond the 
moment a sexual activity begins. Their designs sought to normalize 
transparent dialogue about sexual expectations during online and 
face-to-face interactions preceding sex, which would inform one’s 
decision to give consent and reduce misconceptions over what 
particular sexual acts are consented to. Design concepts intended 
for use during sexual activity sought to identify misalignments 
between verbal consent and nonverbal discomfort with sex in order 
to promote open discussion about the sexual scripts and pressures 
that may incline one’s partner to agree to sex that they actually do 
not want. Collectively the study’s fndings demonstrate potential 
for consent technology to increase adoption of afrmative consent, 
a model of consent exchange intended to prevent sexual violence, 
but that has historically been under-adopted due to perceived bar-
riers and burdens to its consistent practice. The study also informs 
methodological considerations for future work involving marginal-
ized groups in design of technology for consent and other facets of 
sexual experience. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
We thank Jacob Gleason and Karen Feun for their assistance with 
data collection and analysis. We also thank Kelly Berishaj, Michele 
Parkhill Purdie, and Melissa McDonald for invaluable insight that 
informed this study’s design. The constructive feedback from anony-
mous reviewers of this paper is also much appreciated. This material 
is based upon work partially supported by the U.S. National Science 
Foundation under Grant No. IIS-2211896. 
REFERENCES  
[1] UK National Crime Agency. 2022. More under 20s sexually assaulted after meet-
ing ofenders on dating sites. https://www.nationalcrimeagency.gov.uk/news/ 
more-under-20s-sexually-assaulted-after-meeting-ofenders-on-dating-sites 
[2] Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Steven J. Jackson, Nova Ahmed, Hasan Shahid Ferdous, 
Md. Rashidujjaman Rifat, A.S.M Rizvi, Shamir Ahmed, and Rifat Sabbir Mansur. 
2014. Protibadi: A platform for fghting sexual harassment in urban Bangladesh.CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  
2695–2704.  https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557376  
[3]  Kath  Albury,  Paul  Byron,  Anthony  McCosker,  Tinonee  Pym,  Jarrod  Walshe,  
Kane  Race,  Doreen  Salon,  Tim  Wark,  Jessica  Botfeld,  Daniel  Reeders,  and  
Christopher  Dietzel.  2019.  Safety,  risk  and  wellbeing  on  dating  apps:  Final  
report.  https://doi.org/10.25916/5dd324c1b33bb  
[4]  Mohammed  Eunus  Ali,  Shabnam  Basera  Rishta,  Lazima  Ansari,  Tanzima  
Hashem,  and  Ahamad  Imtiaz  Khan.  2015.  SafeStreet:  empowering  women  
against  street  harassment  using  a  privacy-aware  location  based  application.  
Proceedings  of  the  Seventh  International  Conference  on  Information  and  Commu-
nication  Technologies  and  Development,  1–4.  https://doi.org/10.1145/2737856.  
2737870  
[5]  Nazanin  Andalibi,  Oliver  L.  Haimson,  Munmun  De  Choudhury,  and  Andrea  
Forte.  2016.  Understanding  Social  Media  Disclosures  of  Sexual  Abuse  Through  
the  Lenses  of  Support  Seeking  and  Anonymity.  Proceedings  of  the  2016  CHI  
Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  3906–3918.  https://doi.  
org/10.1145/2858036.2858096  
[6]  Monica  Anderson,  Emily  A.  Vogels,  and  Erica  Turner.  2020.  The  virtues  and  
downsides  of  online  dating.  https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2020/02/06/  
the-virtues-and-downsides-of-online-dating/  
[7]  David  Archard.  1998.  How  Should  We  Teach  Sex?  Journal  of  Philosophy  of  
Education  32 (11 1998), 437–450. Issue 3.  https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9752.00107  
[8]  Karla  Badillo-Urquiola,  Afsaneh  Razi,  Jan  Edwards,  and  Pamela  Wisniewski.  
2020.  Children’s  Perspectives  on  Human  Sex  Trafcking  Prevention  Education.  
Companion  of  the  2020  ACM  International  Conference  on  Supporting  Group  Work,  
123–126.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3323994.3369889  
[9]  Jefrey  Bardzell  and  Shaowen  Bardzell.  2011.  Pleasure  is  your  birthright:  digitally  
enabled  designer  sex  toys  as  a  case  of  third-wave  HCI.  Proceedings  of  the  
SIGCHI  conference  on  Human  Factors  in  computing  systems,  257–266.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1978979  
[10]  Jefrey  Bardzell,  Shaowen  Bardzell,  Guo  Zhang,  and  Tyler  Pace.  2014.  The  lonely  
raccoon  at  the  ball:  designing  for  intimacy,  sociability,  and  selfhood.  Proceedings  
of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  3943–3952.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557127  
[11]  Shaowen  Bardzell.  2008.  ENCHANTED  ARTIFACTS:  SOCIAL  PRODUCTIVITY  
AND  IDENTITY  IN  VIRTUAL  MATERIAL  ECOLOGIES.  Artifact  2  (6  2008),  
123–136.  Issue  2.  https://doi.org/10.1080/17493460903020141  
[12]  Shaowen  Bardzell  and  William  Odom.  2008.  The  Experience  of  Embodied  Space  
in  Virtual  Worlds:  An  ethnography  of  a  second  life  community.  Space  and  
Culture  11  (8  2008),  239–259.  Issue  3.  https://doi.org/10.1177/1206331208319148  
[13]  Kathleen  C  Basile,  Sharon  G  Smith,  Matthew  Breiding,  Michele  C  Black,  and  
Reshma  R  Mahendra.  2014.  Sexual  violence  surveillance:  Uniform  defnitions  
and  recommended  data  elements.  Version  2.0.  (2014).  
[14]  Laina  Y.  Bay-Cheng  and  Rebecca  K.  Eliseo-Arras.  2008.  The  Making  of  Unwanted  
Sex:  Gendered  and  Neoliberal  Norms  in  College  Women’s  Unwanted  Sexual  
Experiences.  Journal  of  Sex  Research  45  (11  2008),  386–397.  Issue  4.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1080/00224490802398381  
[15]  Marc  Behrendt.  2018.  Refections  on  Moral  Challenges  Posed  by  a  Therapeutic  
Childlike  Sexbot.  In  Love  and  Sex  with  Robots,  Adrian  David  Cheok  and  David  
Levy  (Eds.).  Springer  International  Publishing,  Cham,  96–113.  
[16]  Genevieve  Bell,  Mark  Blythe,  and  Phoebe  Sengers.  2005.  Making  by  mak-
ing  strange:  Defamiliarization  and  the  design  of  domestic  technologies.  ACM  
Transactions  on  Computer-Human  Interaction  12  (6  2005),  149–173.  Issue  2.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/1067860.1067862  
[17]  Melanie  Beres.  2010.  Sexual  miscommunication?  Untangling  assumptions  about  
sexual  communication  between  casual  sex  partners.  Culture,  Health  &  Sexuality  
12  (1  2010),  1–14.  Issue  1.  https://doi.org/10.1080/13691050903075226  
[18]  Melanie  A  Beres.  2007.  ‘Spontaneous’  Sexual  Consent:  An  Analysis  of  Sexual  
Consent  Literature.  Feminism  &  Psychology  17  (2007),  93–108.  Issue  1.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1177/0959353507072914  
[19]  Melanie  Ann  Beres.  2014.  Rethinking  the  concept  of  consent  for  anti-sexual  
violence  activism  and  education.  Feminism  &  Psychology  24  (8  2014),  373–389.  
Issue  3.  https://doi.org/10.1177/0959353514539652  
[20]  Jeremy  Birnholtz,  Irina  Shklovski,  Mark  Handel,  and  Eran  Toch.  2015.  Let’s  Talk  
About  Sex  (Apps),  CSCW.  Proceedings  of  the  18th  ACM  Conference  Companion  
on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  &  Social  Computing,  283–288.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1145/2685553.2685557  
[21]  Courtney  Blackwell,  Jeremy  Birnholtz,  and  Charles  Abbott.  2014.  Seeing  and  
being  seen:  Co-situation  and  impression  formation  using  Grindr,  a  location-
aware  gay  dating  app.  New  Media  &  Society  (2014),  1–20.  https://doi.org/10.  
1177/1461444814521595  
[22]  Jan  Blom,  Divya  Viswanathan,  Mirjana  Spasojevic,  Janet  Go,  Karthik  Acharya,  
and  Robert  Ahonius.  2010.  Fear  and  the  City:  Role  of  Mobile  Services  in  
Harnessing  Safety  and  Security  in  Urban  Use  Contexts.  Proceedings  of  the  
SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  1841–1850.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753602  
[23]  Mark  Blythe  and  Mark  Jones.  2004.  Human  Computer  (Sexual)  Interactions.  
Interactions  11  (9  2004),  75–76.  Issue  5.  https://doi.org/10.1145/1015530.1015570  Zytko and Furlo 
[24]  Virginia  Braun  and  Victoria  Clarke.  2019.  Refecting  on  refexive  thematic  
analysis.  Qualitative  Research  in  Sport,  Exercise  and  Health  11  (8  2019),  589–597.  
Issue  4.  https://doi.org/10.1080/2159676X.2019.1628806  
[25]  Johanna  Brewer,  Joseph  ’Jofsh’  Kaye,  Amanda  Williams,  and  Susan  Wyche.  
2006.  Sexual  Interactions:  Why  We  Should  Talk  about  Sex  in  HCI.  CHI  ’06  
Extended  Abstracts  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  1695–1698.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1145/1125451.1125765  
[26]  Melissa  Burkett  and  Karine  Hamilton.  2012.  Postfeminist  sexual  agency:  Young  
women’s  negotiations  of  sexual  consent.  Sexualities  15  (10  2012),  815–833.  Issue  
7.  https://doi.org/10.1177/1363460712454076  
[27]  Martha  R.  Burt.  1980.  Cultural  myths  and  supports  for  rape.  Journal  of  Personality  
and  Social  Psychology  38  (1980),  217–230.  Issue  2.  https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
3514.38.2.217  
[28]  Kacie  Cassar  and  Lance  C  Garmon.  2021.  Brief  Report:  Social  Media  and  Hook-
ing  Up  in  College  Emerging  Adults:  Sliding  into  DMs.  Sexuality  in  Emerging  
Adulthood  (1  2021).  https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190057008.003.0020  
[29]  Edmond  Pui  Hang  Choi,  Janet  Yuen  Ha  Wong,  and  Daniel  Yee  Tak  Fong.  2018.  
An  Emerging  Risk  Factor  of  Sexual  Abuse:  The  Use  of  Smartphone  Dating  
Applications.  Sexual  Abuse  30  (6  2018),  343–366.  Issue  4.  https://doi.org/10.  
1177/1079063216672168  
[30]  Nicole  E.  Conroy,  Ambika  Krishnakumar,  and  Janel  M.  Leone.  2015.  Reexamining  
Issues  of  Conceptualization  and  Willing  Consent:  The  Hidden  Role  of  Coercion  
in  Experiences  of  Sexual  Acquiescence.  Journal  of  Interpersonal  Violence  30  (7  
2015),  1828–1846.  Issue  11.  https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260514549050  
[31]  Danielle  Couch  and  Pranee  Liamputtong.  2008.  Online  dating  and  mating:  The  
use  of  the  internet  to  meet  sexual  partners.  Qual.Health  Res  18  (2008),  268–279.  
Issue  2.  https://doi.org/18/2/268[pii];10.1177/1049732307312832[doi]  
[32]  Jiamin  Dai  and  Karyn  Mofatt.  2021.  Surfacing  the  Voices  of  People  with  De-
mentia:  Strategies  for  Efective  Inclusion  of  Proxy  Stakeholders  in  Qualitative  
Research.  In  Proceedings  of  the  2021  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Comput-
ing  Systems  (Yokohama,  Japan)  (CHI  ’21).  Association  for  Computing  Machinery,  
New  York,  NY,  USA,  Article  374,  13  pages.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.  
3445756  
[33]  Donald  Dripps.  1996.  For  a  Negative,  Normative  Model  of  Consent,  With  a  
Comment  on  Preference-Skepticism.  Legal  Theory  2  (6  1996),  113–120.  Issue  2.  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1352325200000422  
[34]  Nicola  Döring,  M  Rohangis  Mohseni,  and  Roberto  Walter.  2020.  Design,  Use,  
and  Efects  of  Sex  Dolls  and  Sex  Robots:  Scoping  Review.  Journal  of  Medical  
Internet  Research  22  (7  2020),  e18551.  Issue  7.  https://doi.org/10.2196/18551  
[35]  Avery  C.  Edenfeld.  2019.  Queering  consent:  Design  and  Sexual  Consent  
Messaging.  Communication  Design  Quarterly  7  (8  2019),  50–63.  Issue  2.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3358931.3358938  
[36]  Alexandra  Fanghanel.  2020.  Asking  for  it:  BDSM  sexual  practice  and  the  trouble  
of  consent.  Sexualities  23  (3  2020),  269–286.  Issue  3.  https://doi.org/10.1177/  
1363460719828933  
[37]  Ashley  K.  Fansher  and  Sara  Eckinger.  2021.  Tinder  Tales:  An  Exploratory  Study  
of  Online  Dating  Users  and  Their  Most  Interesting  Stories.  Deviant  Behavior  42  
(9  2021),  1194–1208.  Issue  9.  https://doi.org/10.1080/01639625.2020.1734170  
[38]  Colin  Fitzpatrick  and  Jeremy  Birnholtz.  2018.  “I  Shut  the  Door”:  Interactions,  
tensions,  and  negotiations  from  a  location-based  social  app.  New  Media  &  Society  
20  (7  2018),  2469–2488.  Issue  7.  https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444817725064  
[39]  Jaclyn  Friedman  and  Jessica  Valenti.  2019.  Yes  means  yes!:  Visions  of  female  
sexual  power  and  a  world  without  rape.  Seal  Press.  
[40]  Hannah  Frith  and  Celia  Kitzinger.  1997.  Talk  about  sexual  miscommunication.  
Women’s  Studies  International  Forum  20  (7  1997),  517–528.  Issue  4.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1016/S0277-5395(97)87415-8  
[41]  Hannah  Frith  and  Celia  Kitzinger.  2001.  Reformulating  Sexual  Script  Theory:  :  
Developing  a  Discursive  Psychology  of  Sexual  Negotiation.  Theory  &  Psychology  
11  (4  2001),  209–232.  Issue  2.  https://doi.org/10.1177/0959354301112004  
[42]  Nicholas  Furlo,  Jacob  Gleason,  Karen  Feun,  and  Douglas  Zytko.  2021.  Re-
thinking  Dating  Apps  as  Sexual  Consent  Apps:  A  New  Use  Case  for  AI-
Mediated  Communication.  Companion  Publication  of  the  2021  Conference  on  
Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  and  Social  Computing,  53–56.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1145/3462204.3481770  
[43]  Claudia  García-Moreno,  Christina  Pallitto,  Karen  Devries,  Heidi  Stöckl,  Char-
lotte  Watts,  and  Naeema  Abrahams.  2013.  Global  and  regional  estimates  of  
violence  against  women:  prevalence  and  health  efects  of  intimate  partner  violence  
and  non-partner  sexual  violence.  World  Health  Organization.  
[44]  Rosa  Gavey.  2019.  Afrmative  Consent  to  Sex:  Is  It  Enough.  NZWLJ  3  (2019),  
35.  
[45]  Louisa  Gilbert,  Aaron  L.  Sarvet,  Melanie  Wall,  Kate  Walsh,  Leigh  Reardon,  
Patrick  Wilson,  John  Santelli,  Shamus  Khan,  Martie  Thompson,  Jennifer  S.  
Hirsch,  and  Claude  A.  Mellins.  2019.  Situational  Contexts  and  Risk  Factors  
Associated  with  Incapacitated  and  Nonincapacitated  Sexual  Assaults  Among  
College  Women.  Journal  of  Women’s  Health  28  (2  2019),  185–193.  Issue  2.  
https://doi.org/10.1089/jwh.2018.7191  
[46]  Rosalie  Gillett.  2018.  Intimate  intrusions  online:  Studying  the  normalisation  of  
abuse  in  dating  apps.  Women’s  Studies  International  Forum  69  (7  2018),  212–219.Online Dating
 as Context to Design Sexual Consent Technology with Women and LGBTQ+ Stakeholders CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wsif.2018.04.005  
[47]  Leonardo  M.  Gomes  and  Rita  Wu.  2018.  Neurodildo:  A  Mind-Controlled  Sex  Toy  
with  E-stim  Feedback  for  People  with  Disabilities.  In  Love  and  Sex  with  Robots,  
Adrian  David  Cheok  and  David  Levy  (Eds.).  Springer  International  Publishing,  
Cham,  65–82.  
[48]  Elizabeth  Goodman  and  Janet  Vertesi.  2012.  Design  for  X?:  Distribution  choices  
and  ethical  design.  CHI  ’12  Extended  Abstracts  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  
Systems,  81–90.  https://doi.org/10.1145/2212776.2212786  
[49]  David  S  Hall.  1998.  Consent  for  sexual  behavior  in  a  college  student  population.  
Electronic  Journal  of  Human  Sexuality  1  (1998),  1–16.  Issue  10.  
[50]  Lynne  Hall.  2017.  Sex  with  Robots  for  Love  Free  Encounters.  In  Love  and  Sex  
with  Robots,  Adrian  David  Cheok,  Kate  Devlin,  and  David  Levy  (Eds.).  Springer  
International  Publishing,  Cham,  128–136.  
[51]  Janet  Halley.  2016.  The  Move  to  Afrmative  Consent.  Signs:  Journal  of  Women  in  
Culture  and  Society  42  (9  2016),  257–279.  Issue  1.  https://doi.org/10.1086/686904  
[52]  Blake  Hallinan,  Jed  R  Brubaker,  and  Casey  Fiesler.  2020.  Unexpected  expec-
tations:  Public  reaction  to  the  Facebook  emotional  contagion  study.  New  
Media  &  Society  22  (6  2020),  1076–1094.  Issue  6.  https://doi.org/10.1177/  
1461444819876944  
[53]  Foad  Hamidi,  Melanie  Baljko,  and  Isabel  Gómez.  2017.  Using  Participatory  De-
sign  with  Proxies  with  Children  with  Limited  Communication.  In  Proceedings  of  
the  19th  International  ACM  SIGACCESS  Conference  on  Computers  and  Accessibility
(Baltimore,  Maryland,  USA)  (ASSETS  ’17).  Association  for  Computing  Machinery,  
New  York,  NY,  USA,  250–259.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3132525.3132527  
[54]  Mark  J.  Handel  and  Irina  Shklovski.  2012.  Disclosure,  ambiguity  and  risk  
reduction  in  real-time  dating  sites.  Proceedings  of  the  17th  ACM  international  
conference  on  Supporting  group  work,  175–178.  https://doi.org/10.1145/2389176.  
2389203  
[55]  Heidi  Hartikainen,  Afsaneh  Razi,  and  Pamela  Wisniewski.  2021.  Safe  Sexting:  
The  Advice  and  Support  Adolescents  Receive  from  Peers  regarding  Online  
Sexual  Risks.  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  on  Human-Computer  Interaction  5  (4  2021),  
1–31.  Issue  CSCW1.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3449116  
[56]  Amy  Adele  Hasinof.  2015.  Sexting  panic:  Rethinking  criminalization,  privacy,  
and  consent.  University  of  Illinois  Press.  
[57]  Susan  E.  Hickman  and  Charlene  L.  Muehlenhard.  1999.  “By  the  semi-mystical  
appearance  of  a  condom”:  How  young  women  and  men  communicate  sexual  
consent  in  heterosexual  situations.  Journal  of  Sex  Research  36  (8  1999),  258–272.  
Issue  3.  https://doi.org/10.1080/00224499909551996  
[58]  Jennifer  S  Hirsch,  Shamus  R  Khan,  Alexander  Wamboldt,  and  Claude  A  Mellins.  
2019.  Social  Dimensions  of  Sexual  Consent  Among  Cisgender  Heterosexual  
College  Students:  Insights  From  Ethnographic  Research.  Journal  of  Adolescent  
Health  64  (2019),  26–35.  Issue  1.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2018.06.011  
[59]  Terry  P  Humphreys.  2004.  Understanding  sexual  consent:  An  empirical  investi-
gation  of  the  normative  script  for  young  heterosexual  adults.  Making  sense  of  
sexual  consent  (2004),  209–225.  
[60]  Stacey  J.  T.  Hust,  Kathleen  Boyce  Rodgers,  and  Benjamin  Bayly.  2017.  Scripting  
Sexual  Consent:  Internalized  Traditional  Sexual  Scripts  and  Sexual  Consent  
Expectancies  Among  College  Students.  Family  Relations  66  (2  2017),  197–210.  
Issue  1.  https://doi.org/10.1111/fare.12230  
[61]  Jane  Im,  Jill  Dimond,  Melody  Berton,  Una  Lee,  Katherine  Mustelier,  Mark  S.  
Ackerman,  and  Eric  Gilbert.  2021.  Yes:  Afrmative  Consent  as  a  Theoretical  
Framework  for  Understanding  and  Imagining  Social  Platforms.  Proceedings  of  
the  2021  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems ,  1–18.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445778  
[62]  Kristen  N  Jozkowski.  2015.  Barriers  to  afrmative  consent  policies  and  the  need  
for  afrmative  sexuality.  The  U.  of  Pac.  L.  Rev.  47  (2015),  741.  
[63]  Kristen  N.  Jozkowski,  Zoë  D.  Peterson,  Stephanie  A.  Sanders,  Barbara  Dennis,  
and  Michael  Reece.  2014.  Gender  Diferences  in  Heterosexual  College  Students’  
Conceptualizations  and  Indicators  of  Sexual  Consent:  Implications  for  Contem-
porary  Sexual  Assault  Prevention  Education.  The  Journal  of  Sex  Research  51  (11  
2014),  904–916.  Issue  8.  https://doi.org/10.1080/00224499.2013.792326  
[64]  Gopinaath  Kannabiran,  Alex  A.  Ahmed,  Matthew  Wood,  Madeline  Balaam,  
Theresa  Jean  Tanenbaum,  Shaowen  Bardzell,  and  Jefrey  Bardzell.  2018.  Design  
for  Sexual  Wellbeing  in  HCI.  Extended  Abstracts  of  the  2018  CHI  Conference  on  
Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  1–7.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.  
3170639  
[65]  Gopinaath  Kannabiran,  Jefrey  Bardzell,  and  Shaowen  Bardzell.  2011.  How  HCI  
Talks  about  Sexuality:  Discursive  Strategies,  Blind  Spots,  and  Opportunities  for  
Future  Research.  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  
Computing  Systems,  695–704.  https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979043  
[66]  Gopinaath  Kannabiran,  Jefrey  Bardzell,  and  Shaowen  Bardzell.  2012.  I  just  made  
love:  The  System  and  the  Subject  of  Experience.  CHI  ’12  Extended  Abstracts  on  
Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  51–60.  https://doi.org/10.1145/2212776.  
2212783  
[67]  Gopinaath  Kannabiran,  Shaowen  Bardzell,  and  Jefrey  Bardzell.  2012.  Designing  
(for)  desire:  A  Critical  Study  of  Technosexuality  in  HCI.  Proceedings  of  the  7th  
Nordic  Conference  on  Human-Computer  Interaction  Making  Sense  Through  Design  
- NordiCHI  ’12,  655.  https://doi.org/10.1145/2399016.2399116  [68]  Patricia  Kazan.  1998.  2.  Sexual  Assault  and  the  Problem  of  Consent.  Cornell  
University  Press,  27–42.  https://doi.org/doi:10.7591/9781501724213-004  
[69]  Mohammad  Khalil,  Paul  Prinsloo,  and  Sharon  Slade.  2018.  The  Unbearable  
Lightness  of  Consent:  :  Mapping  MOOC  Providers’  Response  to  Consent.  
Proceedings  of  the  Fifth  Annual  ACM  Conference  on  Learning  at  Scale,  1–11.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3231644.3231659  
[70]  Hyeok  Kim,  Youjin  Hwang,  Jieun  Lee,  Youngjin  Kwon,  Yujin  Park,  and  Joonhwan  
Lee.  2022.  Personalization  Trade-ofs  in  Designing  a  Dialogue-based  Information  
System  for  Support-Seeking  of  Sexual  Violence  Survivors.  CHI  Conference  on  
Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  1–15.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.  
3517484  
[71]  Lindah  Kotut  and  D.  Scott  McCrickard.  2022.  The  TL;DR  Charter:  Speculatively  
Demystifying  Privacy  Policy  Documents  and  Terms  Agreements.  Proc.  ACM  
Hum.-Comput.  Interact.  6,  GROUP,  Article  23  (jan  2022),  14  pages.  https://doi.  
org/10.1145/3492842  
[72]  Una  Lee  and  Dan  Toliver.  2017.  Building  Consentful  Tech.  Retrieved  January  25,  
2023  from  http://www.consentfultech.io/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/Building-
Consentful-Tech.pdf  
[73]  California  State  Legislature.  2014.  SB-967  Student  safety:  sexual  assault.  Retrieved  
January  25,  2023  from  https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.  
xhtml?bill_id=201320140SB967  
[74]  Camille  E  LeGrand.  1973.  Rape  and  rape  laws:  Sexism  in  society  and  law.  Calif.  
L.  Rev.  61  (1973),  919.  
[75]  Christian  Licoppe,  Carole  Anne  Rivière,  and  Julien  Morel.  2017.  Proximity  
awareness  and  the  privatization  of  sexual  encounters  with  strangers.  Place,  
Space,  and  Mediated  Communication  (4  2017),  45–65.  https://doi.org/10.4324/  
9781315394183-4  
[76]  Lian  Loke,  Aaron  Blishen,  Carl  Gray,  and  Naseem  Ahmadpour.  2021.  Safety,  
Connection  and  Refection:  Designing  with  Therapists  for  Children  with  Serious  
Emotional  Behaviour  Issues.  In  Proceedings  of  the  2021  CHI  Conference  on  Human  
Factors  in  Computing  Systems  (Yokohama,  Japan)  (CHI  ’21).  Association  for  
Computing  Machinery,  New  York,  NY,  USA,  Article  162,  17  pages.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445178  
[77]  Kimberly  A.  Lonsway  and  Louise  F.  Fitzgerald.  1994.  Rape  Myths.  In  Review.  
Psychology  of  Women  Quarterly  18  (6  1994),  133–164.  Issue  2.  https://doi.org/10.  
1111/j.1471-6402.1994.tb00448.x  
[78]  Nuria  Lorenzo-Dus,  Anina  Kinzel,  and  Matteo  Di  Cristofaro.  2020.  The  
communicative  modus  operandi  of  online  child  sexual  groomers:  Recurring  
patterns  in  their  language  use.  Journal  of  Pragmatics  155  (1  2020),  15–27.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pragma.2019.09.010  
[79]  Ewa  Luger  and  Tom  Rodden.  2013.  An  informed  view  on  consent  for  UbiComp.  
Proceedings  of  the  2013  ACM  international  joint  conference  on  Pervasive  and  
ubiquitous  computing,  529–538.  https://doi.org/10.1145/2493432.2493446  
[80]  Catharine  A  MacKinnon.  1989.  Toward  a  feminist  theory  of  the  state.  Harvard  
University  Press.  
[81]  H.  M.  Malm.  1996.  The  Ontological  Status  of  Consent  and  its  Implications  for  
the  Law  on  Rape.  Legal  Theory  2  (6  1996),  147–164.  Issue  2.  https://doi.org/10.  
1017/S1352325200000446  
[82]  Claude  A.  Mellins,  Kate  Walsh,  Aaron  L.  Sarvet,  Melanie  Wall,  Louisa  Gilbert,  
John  S.  Santelli,  Martie  Thompson,  Patrick  A.  Wilson,  Shamus  Khan,  Stephanie  
Benson,  Karimata  Bah,  Kathy  A.  Kaufman,  Leigh  Reardon,  and  Jennifer  S.  Hirsch.  
2017.  Sexual  assault  incidents  among  college  undergraduates:  Prevalence  and  
factors  associated  with  risk.  PLOS  ONE  12  (11  2017),  e0186471.  Issue  11.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0186471  
[83]  Md  Waliur  Rahman  Miah,  John  Yearwood,  and  Sid  Kulkarni.  2011.  Detection  
of  child  exploiting  chats  from  a  mixed  chat  dataset  as  a  text  classifcation  task.  
Proceedings  of  the  Australasian  Language  Technology  Association  Workshop  2011,  
157–165.  
[84]  Nabila  Rezwana  Mirza,  Shareen  Mahmud,  Prosonna  Hossain  Nabila,  and  Nova  
Ahmed.  2016.  Poster:  Protibaadi:  An  Extended  Solution  to  Deal  with  Sexual  
Harassment.  Proceedings  of  the  14th  Annual  International  Conference  on  Mobile  
Systems,  Applications,  and  Services  Companion,  59–59.  https://doi.org/10.1145/  
2938559.2948796  
[85]  Miljana  Mladenović,  Vera  Ošmjanski,  and  Staša  Vujičić  Stanković.  2021.  Cyber-
aggression,  Cyberbullying,  and  Cyber-grooming.  Comput.  Surveys  54  (4  2021),  
1–42.  Issue  1.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3424246  
[86]  Manisha  Mohan,  Misha  Sra,  and  Chris  Schmandt.  2017.  Technological  in-
terventions  to  detect,  communicate  and  deter  sexual  assault.  Proceedings  
of  the  2017  ACM  International  Symposium  on  Wearable  Computers,  126–129.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3123021.3123031  
[87]  Robin  Morgan.  2014.  Going  too  far:  The  personal  chronicle  of  a  feminist.  Open  
Road  Media.  
[88]  Charlene  L  Muehlenhard,  Terry  P  Humphreys,  Kristen  N  Jozkowski,  and  Zoë  D  
Peterson.  2016.  The  Complexities  of  Sexual  Consent  Among  College  Students:  A  
Conceptual  and  Empirical  Review.  The  Journal  of  Sex  Research  53  (2016),  457–487.  
Issue  4-5.  https://doi.org/10.1080/00224499.2016.1146651  PMID:  27044475.  
[89]  Michael  J  Muller.  2007.  Participatory  design:  the  third  space  in  HCI.  The  
human-computer  interaction  handbook  (2007),  1087–1108.CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
[90]  Josef  Nguyen  and  Bonnie  Ruberg.  2020.  Challenges  of  Designing  Consent:  
Consent  Mechanics  in  Video  Games  as  Models  for  Interactive  User  Agency.  
Proceedings  of  the  2020  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  
1–13.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376827  
[91]  Midas  Nouwens,  Ilaria  Liccardi,  Michael  Veale,  David  Karger,  and  Lalana  Kagal.  
2020.  Dark  Patterns  after  the  GDPR:  Scraping  Consent  Pop-ups  and  Demonstrat-
ing  their  Infuence.  Proceedings  of  the  2020  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  
Computing  Systems,  1–13.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376321  
[92]  Rebecca  R  Ortiz  and  Autumn  Shafer.  2018.  Unblurring  the  lines  of  sexual  consent  
with  a  college  student-driven  sexual  consent  education  campaign.  Journal  of  
American  college  health  66  (2018),  450–456.  Issue  6.  https://doi.org/10.1080/  
07448481.2018.1431902  
[93]  Todd  A  Ostler.  2003.  Verbal  and  nonverbal  dating  behaviors  and  sexual  consent:  
Implications  for  miscommunication  between  men  and  women.  ,  228  pages.  
https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/verbal-nonverbal-dating-
behaviors-sexual-consent/docview/288073201/se-2?accountid=12924https:  
//col-oakland.primo.exlibrisgroup.com/discovery/openurl?institution=  
01COL_OAKLAND&vid=01COL_OAKLAND:OU&?url_ver=Z39  
[94]  Lucia  F.  O’Sullivan  and  Elizabeth  Rice  Allgeier.  1998.  Feigning  sexual  desire:  
Consenting  to  unwanted  sexual  activity  in  heterosexual  dating  relationships.  
Journal  of  Sex  Research  35  (8  1998),  234–243.  Issue  3.  https://doi.org/10.1080/  
00224499809551938  
[95]  Planned  Parenthood.  2023.  Sexual  consent.  Retrieved  January  25,  2023  from  
https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/relationships/sexual-consent  
[96]  Hyanghee  Park  and  Joonhwan  Lee.  2021.  Designing  a  Conversational  Agent  for  
Sexual  Assault  Survivors:  Defning  Burden  of  Self-Disclosure  and  Envisioning  
Survivor-Centered  Solutions.  Proceedings  of  the  2021  CHI  Conference  on  Human  
Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  1–17.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445133  
[97]  Zoe  D.  Peterson  and  Charlene  L.  Muehlenhard.  2007.  Conceptualizing  the  
“Wantedness”  of  Women’s  Consensual  and  Nonconsensual  Sexual  Experiences:  
Implications  for  How  Women  Label  Their  Experiences  With  Rape.  Journal  of  Sex  
Research  44  (4  2007),  72–88.  Issue  1.  https://doi.org/10.1080/00224490709336794  
[98]  Olivia  Petter.  2018.  WHY  CONSENT  APPS  DON’T  WORK,  ACCORD-
ING  TO  CRIMINAL  LAWYERS.  Retrieved  January  25,  2023  from  
https://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/consent-apps-problems-dating-
uconsent-sexual-assault-legal-court-a8332706.html  
[99]  Lois  Pineau.  1989.  Date  rape:  A  feminist  analysis.  Law  and  Philosophy  8  (2  1989),  
217–243.  Issue  2.  https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00160012  
[100]  Anastasia  Powell  and  Nicola  Henry.  2019.  Technology-Facilitated  Sexual  Vio-
lence  Victimization:  Results  From  an  Online  Survey  of  Australian  Adults.  Journal  
of  Interpersonal  Violence  34  (2019),  3637–3665.  Issue  17.  https://doi.org/10.1177/  
0886260516672055  PMID:  27697966.  
[101]  Igor  Primorac.  1999.  Radical  feminism  on  rape.  Društvena  istraživanja-Časopis  
za  opća  društvena  pitanja  8  (1999),  497–511.  Issue  42.  https://www.ceeol.com/  
search/article-detail?id=750400  
[102]  Brandie  Pugh  and  Patricia  Becker.  2018.  Exploring  Defnitions  and  Prevalence  
of  Verbal  Sexual  Coercion  and  Its  Relationship  to  Consent  to  Unwanted  Sex:  Im-
plications  for  Afrmative  Consent  Standards  on  College  Campuses.  Behavioral  
Sciences  8  (8  2018),  69.  Issue  8.  https://doi.org/10.3390/bs8080069  
[103]  Kane  Race.  2015.  Speculative  pragmatism  and  intimate  arrangements:  online  
hook-up  devices  in  gay  life.  Culture,  Health  &  Sexuality  17  (4  2015),  496–511.  
Issue  4.  https://doi.org/10.1080/13691058.2014.930181  
[104]  RAINN.  2023.  What  Consent  Looks  Like.  Retrieved  January  25,  2023  from  
https://www.rainn.org/articles/what-is-consent  
[105]  Afsaneh  Razi,  Karla  Badillo-Urquiola,  and  Pamela  J.  Wisniewski.  2020.  Let’s  
Talk  about  Sext:  How  Adolescents  Seek  Support  and  Advice  about  Their  Online  
Sexual  Experiences.  Proceedings  of  the  2020  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  
Computing  Systems,  1–13.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376400  
[106]  Afsaneh  Razi,  Seunghyun  Kim,  Ashwaq  Alsoubai,  Gianluca  Stringhini,  Thamar  
Solorio,  Munmun  De  Choudhury,  and  Pamela  J.  Wisniewski.  2021.  A  Human-
Centered  Systematic  Literature  Review  of  the  Computational  Approaches  for  
Online  Sexual  Risk  Detection.  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  on  Human-Computer  
Interaction  5  (10  2021),  1–38.  Issue  CSCW2.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3479609  
[107]  Janine  Rowse,  Caroline  Bolt,  and  Sanjeev  Gaya.  2020.  Swipe  right:  the  emergence  
of  dating-app  facilitated  sexual  assault.  A  descriptive  retrospective  audit  of  
forensic  examination  caseload  in  an  Australian  metropolitan  service.  Forensic  
Science,  Medicine  and  Pathology  16  (2020),  71–77.  Issue  1.  https://doi.org/10.  
1007/s12024-019-00201-7  
[108]  Muhammad  Yasir  Sarosh,  Muhammad  Abdullah  Yousaf,  Mair  Muteeb  Javed,  
and  Suleman  Shahid.  2016.  MehfoozAurat:  Transforming  smart  phones  into  
women  safety  devices  against  harassment.  Proceedings  of  the  Eighth  International  
Conference  on  Information  and  Communication  Technologies  and  Development,  
1–4.  https://doi.org/10.1145/2909609.2909645  
[109]  Christine  Satchell  and  Marcus  Foth.  2010.  Fear  and  danger  in  nocturnal  urban  
environments.  Proceedings  of  the  22nd  Conference  of  the  Computer-Human  
Interaction  Special  Interest  Group  of  Australia  on  Computer-Human  Interaction,  
380–383.  https://doi.org/10.1145/1952222.1952308  Zytko and Furlo 
[110]  Christine  Satchell  and  Marcus  Foth.  2011.  Welcome  to  the  jungle:  HCI  after  dark.  
CHI  ’11  Extended  Abstracts  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  753–762.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/1979742.1979630  
[111]  Matthias  Scheutz  and  Thomas  Arnold.  2016.  Are  we  ready  for  sex  robots?  
2016  11th  ACM/IEEE  International  Conference  on  Human-Robot  Interaction  (HRI),  
351–358.  https://doi.org/10.1109/HRI.2016.7451772  
[112]  Stephen  J  Schulhofer.  2015.  Consent:  What  It  Means  and  Why  It’s  Time  to  
Require  It.  The  U.  of  Pac.  L.  Rev.  47  (2015),  665.  
[113]  Jocelynne  A  Scutt.  1975.  Fraud  and  Consent  in  Rape:  Comprehension  of  the  
Nature  and  Character  of  the  Act  and  Its  Moral  Implications.  Crim.  LQ  18  (1975),  
312.  
[114]  SextEd.  2021.  Want/Will/Won’t  Lists:  A  Helpful  Consent  Tool!  Retrieved  January  
25,  2023  from  https://sexted.org/faq/wantwillwont-lists/  
[115]  Sarath  S.  Shanker  and  Douglas  Zytko.  2022.  The...Tinderverse?:  Opportunities  
and  Challenges  for  User  Safety  in  Extended  Reality  (XR)  Dating  Apps.  https:  
//doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2203.15120  
[116]  Gilla  K.  Shapiro,  Ovidiu  Tatar,  Arielle  Sutton,  William  Fisher,  Anila  Naz,  Samara  
Perez,  and  Zeev  Rosberger.  2017.  Correlates  of  Tinder  Use  and  Risky  Sexual  
Behaviors  in  Young  Adults.  Cyberpsychology,  Behavior,  and  Social  Networking
20  (12  2017),  727–734.  Issue  12.  https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2017.0279  
[117]  Emily  Sherwin.  1996.  Infelicitous  Sex.  Legal  Theory  2  (9  1996),  209–231.  Issue  3.  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1352325200000495  
[118]  William  Simon  and  John  H.  Gagnon.  1986.  Sexual  scripts:  Permanence  and  
change.  Archives  of  Sexual  Behavior  15  (4  1986),  97–120.  Issue  2.  https://doi.  
org/10.1007/BF01542219  
[119]  Aneesha  Singh,  Jo  Gibbs,  and  Ann  Blandford.  2019.  Emotion  and  Experience  
in  Negotiating  HIV-Related  Digital  Resources:  "It’s  not  just  a  runny  nose!".  
Proceedings  of  the  2019  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  
1–14.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300829  
[120]  Sharon  G  Smith,  Xinjian  Zhang,  Kathleen  C  Basile,  Melissa  T  Merrick,  Jing  
Wang,  Marcie  jo  Kresnow,  and  Jieru  Chen.  2018.  The  national  intimate  partner  
and  sexual  violence  survey:  2015  data  brief–updated  release.  (2018).  
[121]  Robert  Sparrow.  2017.  Robots,  Rape,  and  Representation.  International  Journal  
of  Social  Robotics  9  (9  2017),  465–477.  Issue  4.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-
017-0413-z  
[122]  Yolande  Strengers,  Jathan  Sadowski,  Zhuying  Li,  Anna  Shimshak,  and  Flo-
rian  ’Floyd’  Mueller.  2021.  What  Can  HCI  Learn  from  Sexual  Consent?:  A  
Feminist  Process  of  Embodied  Consent  for  Interactions  with  Emerging  Tech-
nologies.  Proceedings  of  the  2021  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  
Systems,  1–13.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445107  
[123]  Norman  Makoto  Su,  Amanda  Lazar,  Jefrey  Bardzell,  and  Shaowen  Bardzell.  
2019.  Of  Dolls  and  Men:  Anticipating  Sexual  Intimacy  with  Robots.  ACM  
Transactions  on  Computer-Human  Interaction  26  (6  2019),  1–35.  Issue  3.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1145/3301422  
[124]  Marie  Louise  Juul  Søndergaard  and  Lone  Koefoed  Hansen.  2018.  Intimate  
Futures:  Staying  with  the  Trouble  of  Digital  Personal  Assistants  through  Design  
Fiction.  Proceedings  of  the  2018  Designing  Interactive  Systems  Conference,  869–880.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196766  
[125]  Maria  Testa,  Carol  VanZile-Tamsen,  Jennifer  A.  Livingston,  and  Mary  P.  Koss.  
2004.  Assessing  Women’s  Experiences  of  Sexual  Aggression  Using  The  Sexual  
Experiences  Survey:  Evidence  for  Validity  and  Implications  for  Research.  Psy-
chology  of  Women  Quarterly  28  (9  2004),  256–265.  Issue  3.  https://doi.org/10.  
1111/j.1471-6402.2004.00143.x  
[126]  Jessica  Vitak,  Katie  Shilton,  and  Zahra  Ashktorab.  2016.  Beyond  the  Belmont  
Principles:  Ethical  Challenges,  Practices,  and  Beliefs  in  the  Online  Data  Research  
Community.  Proceedings  of  the  19th  ACM  Conference  on  Computer-Supported  
Cooperative  Work  &  Social  Computing,  941–953.  https://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.  
2820078  
[127]  Sarah  J.  Walker.  1997.  When  “no”  becomes  “yes”:  Why  girls  and  women  consent  
to  unwanted  sex.  Applied  and  Preventive  Psychology  6  (6  1997),  157–166.  Issue  3.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0962-1849(97)80003-0  
[128]  Mark  Warner,  Andreas  Gutmann,  M.  Angela  Sasse,  and  Ann  Blandford.  2018.  
Privacy  Unraveling  Around  Explicit  HIV  Status  Disclosure  Fields  in  the  Online  
Geosocial  Hookup  App  Grindr.  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  on  Human-Computer  
Interaction  2  (11  2018),  1–22.  Issue  CSCW.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3274450  
[129]  Mark  Warner,  Juan  F.  Maestre,  Jo  Gibbs,  Chia-Fang  Chung,  and  Ann  Blandford.  
2019.  Signal  Appropriation  of  Explicit  HIV  Status  Disclosure  Fields  in  Sex-Social  
Apps  used  by  Gay  and  Bisexual  Men.  Proceedings  of  the  2019  CHI  Conference  on  
Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  1–15.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.  
3300922  
[130]  Alan  Wertheimer.  1996.  Consent  and  Sexual  Relations.  Legal  Theory  2  (6  1996),  
89–112.  Issue  2.  https://doi.org/10.1017/S1352325200000410  
[131]  Robin  West.  2010.  Sex,  law,  and  consent.  The  ethics  of  consent:  Theory  and  practice  
(2010),  221–250.  http://scholarship.law.georgetown.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?  
article=1073%26context=fwps_papers  
[132]  Malachi  Willis  and  Kristen  N.  Jozkowski.  2018.  Barriers  to  the  Success  of  
Afrmative  Consent  Initiatives:  An  Application  of  the  Social  Ecological  Model.  
American  Journal  of  Sexuality  Education  13  (7  2018),  324–336.  Issue  3.  https:Online Dating as Context to Design Sexual Consent Technology with Women and LGBTQ+ Stakeholders CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
//doi.org/10.1080/15546128.2018.1443300  
[133]
  Matthew  Wood,  Andrew  Garbett,  Kellie  Morrissey,  Peter  Hopkins,  and  Madeline  
Balaam.  2018.  "Protection  on  that  Erection?":  Discourses  of  Accountability  
&  Compromising  Participation  in  Digital  Sexual  Health.  Proceedings  of  the  
2018  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  1–12.  https:  
//doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174238  
[134]  Matthew  Wood,  Gavin  Wood,  and  Madeline  Balaam.  2015.  Talk  about  sex:  
Designing  games  to  facilitate  healthy  discussions  around  sex.  Proceedings  of  
the  2015  Annual  Symposium  on  Computer-Human  Interaction  in  Play,  795–798.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/2793107.2810270  
[135]  Matthew  Wood,  Gavin  Wood,  and  Madeline  Balaam.  2017.  Sex  Talk:  Designing  
for  Sexual  Health  with  Adolescents.  Proceedings  of  the  2017  Conference  on  Inter-
action  Design  and  Children,  137–147.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3078072.3079747  
[136]  Matthew  Wood,  Gavin  Wood,  and  Madeline  Balaam.  2017.  "They’re  Just  Tixel  
Pits,  Man":  Disputing  the  ’Reality’  of  Virtual  Reality  Pornography  through  the  
Story  Completion  Method.  Proceedings  of  the  2017  CHI  Conference  on  Human  
Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  5439–5451.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.  
3025762  
[137]  Chaeyoon  Yoo  and  Paul  Dourish.  2021.  Anshimi:  Women’s  Perceptions  of  
Safety  Data  and  the  Efcacy  of  a  Safety  Application  in  Seoul.  Proceedings  
of  the  ACM  on  Human-Computer  Interaction  5  (4  2021),  1–21.  Issue  CSCW1.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3449221  
[138]  Jonathan  Zong  and  J.  Nathan  Matias.  2022.  Bartleby:  Procedural  and  Substantive  
Ethics  in  the  Design  of  Research  Ethics  Systems.  Social  Media  +  Society  8  (1  2022),  205630512210770.  Issue  1.  https://doi.org/10.1177/20563051221077021  
[139]  Douglas  Zytko,  Nicholas  Furlo,  Bailey  Carlin,  and  Matthew  Archer.  2021.  
Computer-Mediated  Consent  to  Sex:  The  Context  of  Tinder.  Proc.  ACM  Hum.-
Comput.  Interact.  5  (4  2021).  Issue  CSCW1.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3449288  
[140]  Douglas  Zytko,  Sukeshini  A  Grandhi,  and  Quentin  Jones.  2015.  Frustrations  
with  Pursuing  Casual  Encounters  through  Online  Dating.  Proceedings  of  the  
33rd  Annual  ACM  Conference  Extended  Abstracts  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  
Systems,  1935–1940.  https://doi.org/10.1145/2702613.2732905  
[141]  Douglas  Zytko,  Jane  Im,  and  Jonathan  Zong.  2022.  Consent:  A  Research  and  
Design  Lens  for  Human-Computer  Interaction.  In  Companion  Publication  of  the  
2022  Conference  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  and  Social  Computing  
(Virtual  Event,  Taiwan)  (CSCW’22  Companion).  Association  for  Computing  
Machinery,  New  York,  NY,  USA,  205–208.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3500868.  
3561201  
[142]  Douglas  Zytko,  Nicholas  Mullins,  Shelnesha  Taylor,  and  Richard  H.  Holler.  2022.  
Dating  Apps  Are  Used  for  More  Than  Dating:  How  Users  Disclose  and  Detect  
(Non-)Sexual  Interest  in  People-Nearby  Applications.  Proc.  ACM  Hum.-Comput.  
Interact.  6,  GROUP,  Article  30  (jan  2022),  14  pages.  https://doi.org/10.1145/  
3492849  
Received  15  September  2022;  revised  13  December  2022;  accepted  13  January  
2023