Report on Women in Logic 2020 & 2021
Sandra Alves Sandra Kiefer Ana Sokolova
University of Porto RWTH Aachen University University of Salzburg
University of Warsaw
This report follows the two latest editions of the International Workshop for Women
in Logic (WiL), which took place on June 30thin 2020 and June 27thin 2021, respec-
tively. Due to the Corona virus pandemic, both events were held virtually, with sig-
niﬁcant success. The 4thWomen in Logic workshop (WiL’20) was part of "Paris Nord
Summer of LoVe 2020", a joint event on LOgic and VEriﬁcation at Université Paris
13, made of Petri Nets 2020, IJCAR 2020, FSCD 2020, and more than 20 satellite
events. The 5thedition of the workshop (WiL’21) was a satellite event of the 36th An-
nual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS’21). Both editions
were conducted via Zoom, and the 2020 edition was partially streamed on YouTube
(unfortunately, the stream was dropped due to an unsubstantiated complaint and only
tardily restored).
The scientiﬁc program of WiL’20 was comprised of two invited talks: Maribel Fer-
nández (King’s College London) spoke about the use of nominal syntax to deal with
matching and uniﬁcation problems; Alexandra Silva (University College London) de-
scribed an algebraic framework to deal with concurrency. Additionally, there were ﬁf-
Fig. 1. WiL 2020 group photo
ACM SIGLOG News 31 April 2022, Vol. 9, No. 2teen contributed talks covering a variety of topics, as well as six posters. The complete
programme, abstracts, and posters can be found at https://sites.google.com/g.uporto.pt/
wil2020/.
Due to being an online event with no registration fee, the workshop had an im-
pressive number of 165 pre-registrations. Of those, a total of 95 participants joined
the Zoom session for the workshop at some point throughout the day. The number of
participants connected at the same time ranged from around 30 to around 40. The
accepted posters were uploaded to the workshop website and presented in a poster
session during a coffee break, which was organised in breakout rooms on Zoom. Our
goal was to recreate the interaction of a live poster session as much as possible.
The program included an online get-together that served as a social gathering, but
also gave the participants the opportunity to discuss several issues, ranging from prac-
tical aspects related to future editions of WiL and other associated events to more per-
sonal aspects and, in particular, the huge impact of the pandemic on the lives and work
of female researchers. But despite the severeness of the discussed topics and the phys-
ical distance between the participants, there was an undeniable sense of community,
sharing, and understanding.
The 2021 scientiﬁc program included two invited talks: Simona Ronchi Della Rocca
(Università di Torino) talked about the use of intersection type systems to charac-
terise termination in a probabilistic setting; Rineke Verbrugge (University of Gronin-
gen) shared her experience with zero-one laws in a variety of models. It was an hon-
our to have such distinguished and well-respected researchers as invited speakers
of our event. In addition, there were nine contributed talks, organized in three ses-
sions, and six posters. The complete programme, abstracts, and posters can be found
at https://sites.google.com/g.uporto.pt/wil2021/.
For the 2021 edition, there were two dedicated poster sessions, which were conducted
once again via the Zoom breakout-room functionality. Both sessions were very dynamic
and, in particular, Maureen Eckert’s poster on “Non-Domination and Centering in Val
Plumwood’s Feminist Logic” attracted a lot of participants. Although the event was
(once again) held online, there was a mandatory registration fee that had a big nega-
tive impact on the number of participants. This impact was reduced by the generous
support of our sponsors, who enabled us to cover the registration fees for all the par-
ticipants that applied for funding. The maximum number of participants throughout
the day was around 30.
Similarly to the previous year, we combined the business meeting with an online
get-together, providing an opportunity to discuss the future of WiL and also to share
experiences as female researchers during pandemic times. The atmosphere of the en-
tire event was once more uplifting and nourishing, which is an important part of the
WiL mission.
The WiL workshop was very fortunate to count on the generous support from the
Special Interest Group of the ACM for Logic (SIGLOG), the Vienna Center for Logic
and Algorithms at the Vienna University of Technology, and the Institute of Logic,
Language and Computation of the University of Amsterdam. This support was partic-
ularly relevant for the 2021 edition, since it allowed us to cover the registration cost
for several participants.
ACM SIGLOG News 32 Vol. 9, No. 2, April 2022Fig. 2. WiL 2021 group photo
ACM SIGLOG News 33 Vol. 9, No. 2, April 2022