128Religion and Sustainability: Lessons of Sustainable
Computing from Islamic Religious Communities
MOHAMMAD RASHIDUJJAMAN RIFAT, University of Toronto, Canada
TOHA TORIQ, Islamic University, Bangladesh
SYED ISHTIAQUE AHMED, University of Toronto, Canada
While persuasion has often been considered an important design tool for achieving sustainable behavior, a
growing scholarship is criticizing it for its narrow focus on individuals and an overarching economic worldview.
This criticism is often based on the limitations of economic-rationales that many persuasive design efforts hold
and cannot fully capture the values of people who reside outside the modern scientific world - especially where
values originate from and are shaped by religiosity and spirituality. We join this discourse and argue that such
a narrow view of persuasion sidelines the theological roots. Based on our six-month long ethnography with
the Islamic communities in a Bangladeshi city, Kushtia, we describe how ‘motivation’ and ‘habit’ are built
there - two of the basic components of persuasion. Drawing from a rich body of literature on the sociology of
religions and theology, we highlight how Islamic values are closely tied to the idea of persuasion and reflect a
vision of sustainable living. We further discuss how such a deeper understanding of religious values can help
design for sustainable living and broaden the scope of CSCW literature in the various domains.
CCS Concepts: •Human-centered computing →HCI theory, concepts and models ;Ethnographic
studies .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: sustainability; religion; faith; persuasion; habits; rhetoric; islam; environ-
ment; design
ACM Reference Format:
Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat, Toha Toriq, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. Religion and Sustainability:
Lessons of Sustainable Computing from Islamic Religious Communities. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 4,
CSCW2, Article 128 (October 2020), 32 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3415199
1 INTRODUCTION
As of 2015, 84% of the world population is subscribed to religious groups [ 121], with the percentage of
people who are religiously affiliated is expected to further increase in the next several decades [ 120,
122]. Despite the pervasiveness of religiosity [ 20,55,62,123,134,145], it has not received much
attention in CSCW, HCI, and related areas, save for a few exceptions. This lack of attention might
be explained by the scholarships’ predominant focus on modern science and euro-centrism [141],
and a series of serious complaints against religions that include an ignorance of ‘evidence-based’
truth [ 119], creating stereotypes [ 31], stigma [ 153], inequality [ 77], and instigating people to do
heinous crimes (islamophobia [ 130], for example). While all of these are serious concerns and
warrant our close attention, a broad-brush negative portrayal of all religious practices may also
Authors’ addresses: Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat, University of Toronto, 40 St. George Street, Toronto, ON, Canada,
rifat@cs.toronto.edu; Toha Toriq, Islamic University, Kushtia, Bangladesh, toha.bd@gmail.com; Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed,
University of Toronto, 40 St. George Street, Toronto, ON, Canada, ishtiaque@cs.toronto.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
2573-0142/2020/10-ART128 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3415199
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:2 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
produce serious social consequences by marginalizing many people around the world who subscribe
to religious cultures to varying degrees. Scholars of theology, religions, and social sciences have long
been arguing for a pragmatic discourse between faith and reasoning [ 87,161], that is often missing
in CSCW and HCI. To this end, in this paper, we concentrate on the sustainability works in CSCW
and HCI and explore Islamic religious values and practices of sustainable living in Bangladesh with
a vision to inform the sustainable design of a broader idea of persuasion.
Environmental sustainability has been receiving notable academic [ 48,64,65] and public at-
tention [ 112,150,167] in recent years. CSCW and its related disciplines have responded to this
call by giving rise to the emerging field of sustainable HCI [ 25,29,47,49]. This field has thus far
incorporated perspectives from a wide range of disciplines including interaction design [ 25], repair
and recycle [ 10,78,85,128], infrastructural politics [ 12,15,80], gamification [ 98], persuasive tech-
nologies [ 18], and sensing [ 17] with a goal of designing technologies for environmental awareness
and behavioral changes towards sustainability (for a review of the literature, see DiSalvo et al. [ 47]).
A dominant strand of research within this pool is comprised of persuasive technologies for positive
behavioral changes towards protecting the environment [ 58,104,135]. The design principle in this
thread of work is predominantly based on B. J. Fogg’s celebrated model of behavioral persuasion
that functions through a cost-benefit analysis between ‘motivation’ and ‘affordability’ [ 57]. A rich
body of research has been produced using Fogg’s model to design technologies that can motivate a
person toward sustainable behaviors (see [ 146,151,168], for example). This literature often makes
parallel assumptions of the market and nature [ 49]. As such, people are treated as rational actors
that act in accordance with the market logic of “less consumption” and “resource preservation”.
Under this market idealism, sustainability is an individualistic, case-specific, and apolitical issue, and
cases of unsustainable behavior could be manipulated using economic metaphors [ 49,95]. These
assumptions resemble a modern secular worldview, where humans have a uniform orientation
towards natural elements, and they are equally empowered with cognitive resources, autonomy,
and freedom to make their own rational choices [169].
However, these modernist economic assumptions about rational behavior towards the environ-
ment, and the associated models of persuasion, might not be able to explain people’s habits and
lifestyles where religious, spiritual, and occult practices play a dominant role. An economic under-
standing of rational choices prioritizes tangible, concrete, and immediate “rewards” over everything
else that seems symbolic, unreal, and to be provided in the far future [ 156]. On the contrary, the
primary source of habits and life choices are rooted in religious and spiritual motivations for many
people worldwide [ 20,55,62,123,145], especially in non-Western regions where religion is still
a dominant force in social life [ 24,27,91,141,144]. There are many examples worldwide where
faith-based institutions are involved in pro-environmental activities and movements where other
models of persuasion work [ 132,159]. Such models demonstrate how faith-based motivations,
habits, lifestyles, and activism could also produce effective persuasive techniques for promoting
sustainability. The objective of this paper is to shed light on these practices and thus advance
CSCW’s work on sustainability.
In this paper, we present our findings from our study with Bangladeshi Islamic religious commu-
nities to re-imagine persuasion and sustainability going beyond the existing market-driven models.
Drawing on our six-month-long ethnography in Bangladeshi mosques, madrasahs1, orphanages,
1Please look at the Table 1 for meanings of religious/foreign words
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:3
and a Trust2, we explicate habits and lifestyles that have implicit or explicit connections to sustain-
ability. Guided by a broad inquiry around the relationship of sustainability and Islamic values, we
particularly make the following contributions to the CSCW literature:
•Our study enriches CSCW scholarship around sustainability by documenting the sustainable
living practices within the Islamic communities in Bangladesh. We present motivations
and contextual cues for promoting certain behavioral actions, turning behaviors into habits
through formal education and informal social practices, and sustaining habits through divine
controls. These are all intrinsically or extrinsically tied to how sustainability is approached
in the everyday lifestyle in these communities – a lesson that helps CSCW scholarship to
better engage with sustainability practices.
•This paper also joins the growing movement within CSCW community against the “quan-
tification [ 108]” and “economization [ 109]” of life. We demonstrate how a departure from
the micro-economic narrative of sustainability, and an embracement of the alternative ra-
tionales grounded in religious values might deliver effective means of sustainable design.
Additionally, we discuss how CSCW and HCI’s existing conceptual techniques can support
these alternative viewpoints to advance sustainability research further.
Thus, we believe that our contribution will help CSCW literature better engage with a wider
range of religious and spiritual values and make a broader impact on sustainability research. In
this paper, our contributions are informed by the Islamic religion. We carefully avoid making any
kind of generalizations at the level of findings, but we do expect our findings to problematize the
secular standpoint of computing literature that may eventually make a path for other religious
perspectives [42, 52, 88].
2 RELIGION, SOCIAL ACTION, AND RATIONAL CHOICE
This paper attempts to make a connection between sustainability and the Islamic religious lifestyle.
This question alludes to a discussion of the concept of religion to interpret the contribution of
this paper. We draw on the ways scholars in the sociology of religion have often characterized the
concept of religion. This theoretical alignment benefits us by providing a powerful lens through
which we explore the functional aspects of behaviors and the habits of the people that live by
religious values. Furthermore, the sociology of religion gives us the capability to participate in a
strongly relevant debate involving rational choice theory and religious behaviours.
Sociology of religion heavily draws on Emile Durkheim, Max Weber, Karl Marx, among others’
works on identifying religion as a unique socio-cultural element [ 40]. Emile Durkheim defines
religion as a system of beliefs and practices relative to “sacred” things [ 51]. Durkheim’s definition
of religion presents “practice” as an equally essential component as “belief”. Many proponents
of his concept of religion present it as a socially healthy element that provides “function” to a
society [ 40]. Max Weber did not provide a complete definition for religion and left it more open
to possible alternative characterizations [ 157]. However, there have been many interpretations of
Weber’s characterization of religion. For example, Christiano et al. build on Weber and provide six
components of social relationship dimensions of religion: “a belief in one or several of a wide variety
of supernatural powers that are evidenced in a variety of charismatic manifestations, articulated
through symbolic expressions, responded to in a variety of forms, under the guidance of various types
of leaders, in a variety of patterns of relationships significantly determined by the patterned behavior
2In Bangladesh, the word ‘Trust’ commonly refers to an organization that combines several smaller units. In this paper, we
use this term to refer as the umbrella institution that combines mosques, madrasahs , orphanages, community health centers,
libraries, and business wings under an aggregated administrative and financial system. We studied one such Trust in our
fieldwork at Kushtia.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:4 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
of the lay people of the community" [40]. Durkheim’s and Weber’s definitions have led to two
different traditions within the sociology of religion: 1) functional (from Durkheim), where religion
performs certain functions in the society, and 2) substantive (from Weber), where there are certain
contents around which religion surrounds [ 40]. Both definitions refer to a broad set of religions
worldwide. There is an agreement across all perspectives of studying religion: what makes religion a
sociological component is, as Christiano et al. put, “it is something that people do" [ 40], which further
emphasizes religion as an important factor that drives social actions. This broad understanding
of religion helps us posit religious values as the roots of many social practices and conceptualize
social actions as (re)producers of religious values.
2.0.1 Islamic Religion in Bangladesh. We give here a brief historical and cultural context of the
Islamic religion in Bangladesh. Bangladesh is the third-largest Muslim majority nation in the
world [ 160]. Muslims make up approximately 90% of the country’s population. Many of Bangladeshi
traditions and norms have a strong historical lineage with the religion of Islam. Political dominance
of Islam started here with the arrival of Turkish soldiers in the 13𝑡ℎcentury [ 53]. Since this historic
moment, Islam politically dominated most parts of Bengal for five centuries. To this day, the cultural
and social formation of five hundred years of Bengali sultanate and Mughal power and their rich
heritage still resonate in the lives of millions of Bengali Muslims [53].
There are several interpretive traditions of Islamic religion in Bangladesh [ 3, p. 54–64]. The
dominant tradition in Bangladesh is Sunni . The presence and influences of other traditions (e.g.,
Shia,Ahmadiyya ) are negligible compared to the Sunni group. Although there are ideological
disagreements in regard to some Islamic historical events and rituals among them, most of the basic
practices do not radically depart from one another. Islam has left tell-tale marks in the majority
of festivals, cuisines, dresses, norms, and other cultural elements. The impact is visible in public
politics, where Islamic parties strongly exercise influence and invariably change political equations
even in the age of modern secular politics and state formation [ 73].Madrasah education is as
prevalent as mainstream education in the country [ 4]. Banking, insurance, and small investment
companies that follow Islamic principles are very popular in Bangladesh [ 133]. Overall, Islam has a
strong influence in social, cultural, economical, and political spheres in Bangladesh.
2.1 Religion and Rational Choice Theory
In this paper, we demonstrate an Islamic value system that is aligned with sustainable behaviours,
which we argue is distinct from an economically rooted cost-benefit analysis. One of the major
theoretical approaches for studying social and behavioral aspects of religion explains religious
behaviors as “rational”, similar to one defined by the rational choice theory in economics (see, for
example, [ 21,81]). The core of such an approach is that people analyze the costs and benefits of an
action (in terms of religion-defined currencies) and make a decision based on what rewards they
get in return [ 81]. This theory has been used to explain many religious phenomena: such as why
strict Churches are strict, why people stick to religion more when they are old, and so on [ 40]. To
argue about the significance, one of the proponents of this theory, Iannaccone writes, “the logic
of economics and even its languages are powerful tools for the socio-scientific study of religion" [81].
Hence, religion provides an alternative rationality for making choices, from this perspective.
However, this approach of studying religious behaviors in economic terms has been criticized
as being a simplistic and reductionist approach within the sociology of religion. Wallis and Bruce
flag the rational choice theory as being devoid of rich contextual and cultural contexts leading
to an interpretative gap between the theory and the people whose behaviors are explained [ 156].
They argue that rational choice theory prioritizes tangible, concrete, and immediate rewards as
opposed to everything else that seems symbolic, unreal, and promise to be provided in the far
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:5
future. In a similar vein, Spickard dissects Innacconne’s postulation of rational choice theory and
concludes that the assumptions of the rational choice theory are either false or vague [ 137]. He
says, “By reducing religion to behavior, the rational-choice approach rules a sociology of culture out
of court" [137]. Overall, the critiques suggest that rational choice theory forces religion into a
rationalistic framework, which is both incomplete and incorrect. Religious people do not choose
one of the available options based on their free will, but pick the ‘right’ one being guided by
their faith and practices. Hence, they further argue that the rational choice theory should not be
a generalized lens to explain how religious people behave across cultures, contexts, and other
sociological particularities [40].
We acknowledge these difficulties of explaining behaviors coming from religious values and
further present that religion can provide a different framing of the rationalism of HCI. Most
sociological investigations can only comment on whether or not an individual coming from a
social group has the possibility of performing an action [ 40]. This necessitates studying people
in the specific social setting in a particular time and space. We argue that a more viable route
would be in focusing on a particular group, and understanding their religiosity from their historical,
social, cultural, and political context, instead of studying religion as a fixed text. Additionally, the
minimum that critiques of the rational choice theory might contribute to our work is providing
with some level of affirmation that economic cost-benefit analysis might not be enough to explain
the lifestyle choices and actions associated with religious values.
3 CSCW, SUSTAINABILITY, AND RELIGION
3.1 Sustainability, Persuasion, and Habit
Development Studies [ 99], Economics [ 136], and Ecology [ 64] – all have slightly different definitions
of sustainability. We borrow our concept from environmental sustainability literature and define
the essential elements of sustainability as such: human life, conservation of ecological resources
while improving the agricultural productivity, stable human growth, limited economic growth,
self-reliability, and improved quality of the ecosystem [ 28]. Research in CSCW and HCI has
adopted a similar framework for its definition. During the last decade, research on environment and
sustainability has led to an emerging sub-field within HCI, namely environmental sustainability [ 47].
Sustainability research in HCI finds technological and policy solutions ranging from sensing and
monitoring environmental conditions (e.g., [ 61,93,103]) and raising awareness regarding ecological
issues to driving behavior towards sustainability (e.g., [ 18,90,94]). Mankoff et al. characterized
sustainability scholarships in HCI as fitting into two broad kinds: 1) sustainability of material
aspects of technology while designing them, and 2) promoting sustainable lifestyle through the
design of technology [101].
A dominant genre within sustainable HCI is persuasive computing that aims to change human
attitude and behavior [ 56]. BJ Fogg introduced a model of combining computing technologies and
persuasion for behavioral changes [ 56,57], which heavily contributed to this discipline. Fogg’s
model for persuasion (FBM) has three essential components: motivation, ability, and trigger [ 56].
Motivation inspires people to perform a behavior in the first place. Ability is the ease with which
behavior could be performed. The trigger is a cue that initiates the behavior with the presence
of sufficient motivation and ability. Works in persuasive design often analyze these three factors
in a particular setting and manipulate them through technology to achieve a desired sustainable
behavior in a person. Since the inception of FBM, many researchers within CSCW and HCI have
extended this concept to technology design and interventions for resource management, changing
users’ behavior, and sensing and reporting information [29].
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:6 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
A notable challenge for sustainable HCI is having the changed behavior persist and turning it
to a habit [ 114]. A habit is defined as an automatic behavior [ 154]. Research in CSCW and HCI
for supporting habit formation and change is still nascent. Even in that small pool, there is a
lack of further research that pays attention to the challenges associated with existing habitual
behaviors and sustaining them [ 118]. Persuasive technologies’ lower success rate and short-term
impact might be related to its weighted focus on changing behavior rather than sustaining the
changed behavior [ 96]. In this paper, we aim to address this weakness of persisting a behavior
by identifying sustainable habits in religious communities and their relationship with divine and
social reinforcements. In doing so, we draw on Charles Duhigg’s thesis on the mechanisms of
habit formation in his classical book The Power of Habit . Duhigg defines habit as a loop of cue,
routine , and reward [50].Cueis a trigger that initiates a routine for a particular behavior. Reward
determines if this behavior is worth remembering for the future. This theory of forming, changing,
and sustaining habits has been used widely in marketing [ 155] healthcare [ 102], among other
areas. Duhigg describes habit as the root cause of individual and social behaviors. In light of this
characterization of habits along with other research in CSCW and HCI, we discuss how sustainable
habits could be formed through Islamic religious practices.
3.2 From Microeconomics to Ecological Economics
While a vein of HCI research builds on behavioral theories of persuasion and habit building, there
has also been a criticism in HCI that the design of persuasive technologies is often grounded
in the economic analysis of cost-benefits relating to individual decision-making behaviors [ 49].
Specifically, Dourish finds three problematic effects of existing persuasive designs [ 49]. First, the
relegation of environmental concerns to personal moral choices sidelines issues such as indeter-
minacy of individual impacts, politics of material consumption in market economies, and uneven
distribution of moral responsibilities in the consumer market. Second, modeling natural phenomena
in economic terms evokes a neoliberal ideology that displaces the locus of issues of sustainability
from social to ‘homo economicus’ - an economized individual human. Third, such a framing of
environmental sustainability erases much of state and corporate responsibilities. Similar research
argues that persuasive design normalizes social problems into their simplified and selective ver-
sions and, consequently, narrows the vision of sustainability. [ 29]. Besides the aforementioned
concerns, designing for sustainability involves other challenges including the failure of engaging
with individual and social values originating from various sources, and thereby constraining scopes,
scales, and longevity of sustainable projects [69]. Because of the influence of economic principles
and other challenges, persuasive techniques frame environmental problems improperly, and thus,
solutions provided for the problems do not serve intended purposes [29].
To incorporate broader insights on social and cultural aspects of sustainability, we draw on the
emerging literature in ecological economics. This literature provides insight into extrinsic and
intrinsic motivations for individual and group actions. For example, Williams studies water pollution
and suggests that there is no generalized model for individual activities leading to sustainability;
the model varies based on personal, social, and cultural statuses[ 162]. Similarly, Mock et al. find
that personal growth, living with like-minded people, and purpose in life are some of the intrinsic
motivations for engaging with causes for sustainability [ 106]. The role of religiously and spiritually
motivated behaviors is also present in environmental ecologic literature. For example, mindfulness –
a practice of controlling self-consciousness originated from the Buddhist culture– has been tested
as a means for promoting sustainable behavior [ 44,70,76]. Similarly, Jenkins says that in Chinese
traditions, ecological values are systematically embedded in religious and spiritual culture [ 86].
Overall, this literature in ecological economics suggests that environmental ethics is a socially
constructed value, where extrinsic and intrinsic motivations for sustainability come from social
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:7
influences, religious ethics, a hope for immaterial rewards, and a sense of group-belongings. The
literature in ecological economics places ecology in a broader social, cultural, and economic fabric,
rather than simplifying problems of sustainability solely into economic terms. We build on the
existing literature to extend its suggestions of including religion and spirituality to understand
ecological problems, and bring this perspective to CSCW literature to deepen our understanding
about sustainability.
3.3 Ecological Theology and Islam
The literature of ecological theology and sustainability reports on socio-cultural aspects of sustain-
ability, leadership movements for environmental causes, the motivation of religious communities
to take environmental actions, and the parallelism of religious movements and environmental
movements, among others [ 89]. Ecological theology regards sustainability as deeply rooted in
ethical and cultural values coming from religions [ 89]. Major religions, as well as numerous less
followed ones, engage with the question of ecology and sustainability to touch issues of ethics,
morality, social justice, and gender roles [ 89]. Though sustainability is a common feature with
varying ideology in all religions (see, for example, [ 37,84,139]), we focus on scholarships related
to Islamic religion to conform to the scope of our study.
Islam’s promise to the environment has inspired research relating to education, awareness, values,
ethics, and roles of individuals and social groups as they pertain to environmental causes. For
instance, Rice studies pro-environmental behavior in Egypt and finds positive relationships between
sustainable behavior and religiosity, among other values [ 126]. He characterizes pro-environmental
behavior into three categories: a) private sphere, b) public sphere, and c) activism. He argues that
sustainable public habits are primarily motivated by religion [ 126]. Furthermore, the study suggests
that religiosity is one of the factors that helps build up societal tradition in a neighborhood that
contributes to forming pro-environmental behavior. Dien asserts that Islamic environmental ethics
are overtaken by the industrial culture of materialistic values and proposes Islamic rules as a
ground for revising and reforming international law for the conservation of the environment [ 45].
Besides academia, environmental activism inspired by Islamic religious ethics is common not only
in Muslim majority countries but also in the western world (see, for example [ 43,132,159]). This
strand of literature demonstrates the moral and ethical dimensions of Islamic religious values
in the service of sustainable causes. We extend this understanding and contribute to CSCW by
exploring motivations and habits of Islamic religious communities to design persuasion for positive
behavioral changes and persisting habits.
3.4 Religion, Technology, and CSCW
A strand of research in HCI, CSCW, and other related areas discusses how design can support
religious practices, and conversely, how religion can inform design. For instance, in a recent CSCW
work, Ibtasam et al. study Muslim women’s technology use within the family in Pakistan, in which
they suggest that design be inclusive of religious values when providing Muslim women access to
technology [ 82]. Wyche et al. conduct a design-oriented study in the US and Kenya with a goal to
understand the relation between faith-based worldviews, ICT design, and adoption [ 164]. They
conclude that many secular and religious interests are often intertwined, where a straightforward
extension of current technologies might support use of technologies for religious purposes. In several
other studies, Wyche and her colleagues provide insight into the relation of design and religious
values [ 165,166]. Woodruff et al. study Jewish families’ use of home automation technologies for
religious purposes [ 163]. They assert that the religious communities surrender control to their God
and aspire to have as small a footprint on the earth as they can. They extend this finding to suggest
that such giving up of control could be a valuable design space to explore in domestic settings
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:8 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
as well as spiritual purposes. Outside of HCI, Campbell and her colleagues explore the relation
of religion, internet, and technologies in a series of works [ 33–35]. In a study of "Kosher" phone
use in Israel, she concludes that religious values related to technology are similar to the values
they attach to other aspects of communal life [ 32]. This work reinforces that people’s individual
and community values rooted in religion are extended to their use of technologies. Overall, the
works in HCI, CSCW, and media studies reveal that people reflect their religious values in using
technologies. In doing so, they often “design” their own usability of technology aligning with their
values, norms, and culture.
In summary, the works above along with others [ 110,111] indicate that: (a) religion is a source of
many core values and practices that shape the design and use of technologies, and (b) incorporating
religious diversity in design contributes in assuring a more equitable technology. Such works
relating to religion, design, and technology in CSCW and HCI fall broadly, as Buie and Blythe
categorize, into three major classes: institutional, practical, and experiential3[30]. The works
involve the adopting and adapting of technologies by religious communities, enabling people to
help perform religious activities and rituals, and mediating religious experience through technology.
The studies described above inspire and inform our work in exploring the lifestyle and socio-
religious values of people in Bangladeshi Islamic religious communities. Our contributions in this
paper partly intersects with HCI’s scholarship of exploring entire systems of values, which Ames
et al. call ‘values in collective praxis’ [ 16]. We additionally explore religion as a powerful apparatus
to achieve one of the CSCW and HCI’s central thematic goals, environmental sustainability.
4 METHODS AND FIELDSITES
The initial orientation of our field study was toward understanding how the Islamic religious
communities in Bangladesh are adopting new digital technologies, and how the new computing
technologies are changing their lives. However, we were also keen to understand these issues from
a broad social, cultural, and political context of these communities, and hence, we were ready to
explore different aspects of their lives and the historical development of various practices embedded
in their community life. To this end, we conducted an ethnographic study from March to August of
2019 in six mosques, three madrasahs , two orphanages, and one Trust in Kushtia, Bangladesh, to
understand attitude, motivations, habits, and lifestyles–all that are related to environmental ethics,
resource consumption, and sustainability in Bangladeshi Islamic religious communities. Addition-
ally, we attended two Islamic congregations, known as jamat in Bangladesh. The methods involved
semi-structured and unstructured interviews, participatory observations, making biographies of
imams , and contextual inquiries.
Recruitment and Procedure. All of the authors of this paper were born and raised in Bangladesh.
All authors are Bangladeshi Muslim and have familiarity with Islamic culture in Bangladesh. One
of the authors has been living in Kushtia for the last 16years. He is a regular attendee in his
community mosque. His connection to his local mosque helped him get introduced to the other
mosques in the town.
At the beginning of the study, we took part in daily prayers and other rituals in mosques, were
introduced to the mosques’ clerics and the committee members of the mosque. The introduction with
the clerics happened through general Islamic inquiries about religious regulations on contemporary
issues. In traditional Muslim communities, mosques are treated as the center of religious rituals
and many cultural activities, where the imam is respected not only for his daily prayer services
but also for his religious literacy and wisdom. Although this is not a common practice in recent
3There have been only a handful amount of more works on religion have been done in HCI after this publication. However,
this review of the literature has not changed significantly.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:9
Meaning of Islamic/foreign words/terms
Religious
wordMeaning
Aamir The administrative secretary of a Jamat
Amanah Fulfilling responsibilities and Trusts
Imam The person in charge of conducting spiritual and religious activities
Jamat A religious group traveling to mosques for religious training and preaching
Khadem The person helping mosque in logistic works such as cleaning up, buying
necessary equipment, organizing the mosque for any event, etc
Muazzin The Muslim official of a mosque who summons the faithful to prayer from
a minaret five times a day
Madrasah Islamic religious school
Talim A women group meeting regularly for the purpose of religious education
Ulema Islamic scholar
Ibadah Islamic jurisprudence of Muslim religious rituals
Khutbah Public preaching in Islamic tradition
Jummah Friday or congregational prayer in Islam
Sadaqah
jariyahContinuous charity
Neki Islamic immaterial (often expressed in quantified form) return of good
deeds
Jihad The spiritual struggle within oneself against sin
Sunnah The way of the prophet
Maktab Religious morning schools for children
Dua Summon
Haram Prohibited
Ulemas A body of Muslim scholars recognized as having specialist knowledge of
Islamic sacred law and theology
Shirk The sin of idolatry or polytheism
Tawhid Unification or oneness of God
Khilafah Stewardship
Akhirah Hereafter
Table 1. Meaning of Islamic/foreign words used in the paper.
times, imams appreciate and are encouraged when someone comes to them to discuss religious
or non-religious topics and asks for their Islamic suggestions. This welcoming attitude of imams
created a common interest between us and imams ; we, as researchers were interested in ecological
ethics within Islam and imams had the inspiration to offer their knowledge on that. Every time that
we went for prayers in the mosque, we approached imams , asked fundamental questions about
Islamic wisdom on environmental issues, and followed on with the discussion. By doing so, we
established a relationship with the imams and other clerics in the mosque.
As we got familiar with the mosque community, we expressed and discussed our research agenda
with the clerics. Upon their consent, we requested that the mosque leaders introduce us to nearby
madrasahs ,jamats , orphanages, and Trusts. Over the following two months, we conducted an initial
exploration to understand the lifestyles of the religious communities. After the exploration, we
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:10 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
conducted 27 interviews with mosque leaders, madrasah teachers and students, mosque logistics,
committee members, jamat attendees, and people in the mosque neighborhoods. The selection
of participants followed a snowball sampling method [ 66]. Through interviews, biographies, and
contextual inquiries, we tried to gain insight into the religious communities’ general knowledge and
awareness of environmental elements, conservation behavior, motivation for resource conservation,
religious education on ecological issues, and activism for environmental issues. We conducted 22
semi-structured and five unstructured interviews. Each interview took 35 to 45 minutes to complete.
Interview participants include imams ,muazzins ,khadems , committee members, and attendees from
mosques; students and teachers from madrasahs and orphanages; and founders and donors of the
Trust. Participants were aged between 15 to 60 years. We conducted the interviews in Bengali and
then transcribed and translated into English for analysis. The study produced more than 17 hours
of interviews, four biographies, more than two hundred pictures, and more than a thousand pages
of field notes.
Data Analysis. We analyzed the data from interviews and contextual inquiries following the
theoretical analysis approach [ 115]. The analysis started with some predetermined themes, includ-
ing motivations, lifestyle, and habits as they relate to environmental ethics, sustainability, and
persuasion. The themes were informed by our reading of four literature: sustainability in CSCW
and HCI, ecological economics, ecological theology, and sociology of religion. The themes were all
related to our research questions. We were open to other themes and sub-themes as the analysis ad-
vanced. Two researchers separately started analyzing data through several rounds of reading of the
transcripts. We then intuitively highlighted the transcripts’ relevant parts, which were meaningful
in answering our research questions. In highlighting transcripts, we considered predetermined
themes and remained open to any emerging themes as well. We then employed open and axial
coding to explore patterns and cluster data based on the patterns [ 38]. We combined patterns into
predetermined and emerging themes. The predetermined themes were connected to any emerging
themes related to them. We also used non-highlighted data for contextual cross-checking and
meaning-making with the themes. During the analysis, all the members of the research team met
to discuss codes and themes weekly. The aggregation of data from two analyzers was based on
the consensus of the research team following a thorough discussion of the codes and themes. The
findings reported in this paper combine predetermined and emerged themes and sub-themes.
Our findings involved many foreign words, mostly Arabic, Urdu, and Persian. Participants of
our study also used verses from the Quran or Hadith. A member of our team is proficient in the
languages because of his madrasah educational background. He transcribed the sections in foreign
languages for contextual correctness. In doing this, he discussed multiple contextual meanings of
foreign words and sentences with the rest of the research team and used the most appropriate one
that reflects contextual and normative meaning for Bangladeshi Muslims.
Research ethics, protocol, and data privacy. The study protocol was approved from the first
author’s research ethics board for human subject research. We followed the ethics board’s guidelines
in participant recruitment, consent process, compensation, and data storage and analysis. The risk
communication and data privacy preservation followed guidelines from the research ethics board.
Only researchers in this study had access to the data. As soon as data were transferred to the first
author’s locked computer, the recorded file was deleted from the recording device. Transcripts and
other written data were stored in a locket cabinet owned by the first author. All authors of this
paper are certified by the official training on conducting human subject research.
Gender Inclusion. A major methodological aspect of our study is that, being male researchers,
we were not allowed to connect to the women in madrasahs and mosques due to the administrative
and religious restrictions. As a result, our study is heavily biased toward male participation. This
is a common constraint in many ethnographic fieldworks with Islamic religious communities.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:11
We acknowledge that directly engaging with female participants might give us more insights
into Islamic sustainable practices, which we have missed here because of the gender (male) of
the ethnographer. However, the Islamic scholarship has developed research methods that respect
this gender norms, and an outsider (not directly related person) male can only learn about the
female members of a family through the male members of that family [ 1]. These methods allow an
ethnographer to gather only the knowledge that the male members of that family or community are
willing to share. Having said that, we also highlight that the madrasah education, social interactions,
and family cultures that we report here are not entirely isolated from female views. Although two
out of the three madrasahs , one orphanage, and the Trust have separate female wings, they are run
by the same administration, and they have the same set of educators. Hence, we have not entirely
missed the female perspectives. However, we acknowledge that this insight would be significantly
stronger, and possibly different, if we had female participants. We also want to acknowledge that
discrimination and violence over women are major problems in Bangladesh [ 6,7,9,74,107]. While
we do not know the extent of that problem in the communities that we studied, that might still be
a concern here [ 82]. Hence, their voice might reveal some problematic pictures to the study and
impact the overall message. In our future work, we aim to overcome this challenge by having a
female field researcher with us who will be able to study the Muslim women in these institutions.
We also want to mention that, while there are very few exceptions, women usually do not have
access to Bangladeshi mosques and jamats . So, the scope may still remain limited. Nonetheless,
we acknowledge this methodological constraint in this study, and we want to situate our findings
within this methodological scope.
4.1 Fieldsites
Kushtia is a countryside city in Bangladesh. While many people move to Kushtia for jobs, education,
or business, the majority of the population is native. There are two dominant religious affiliations
in Kushtia: Islam and Hinduism, although some people with other religious affiliations are also
found in the city. People in Kushtia regularly participate in religious and spiritual festivals and
activities. Religious and cultural homogeneity has created a strong communal bond among the
local people.
Our studied mosques are situated in the Kushtia municipality, which is divided into various
“wards”. Most mosques are located in quiet neighborhoods, while the rests are roadside mosques
adjacent to busy markets and shopping areas. We studied two types of madrasahs :Alia madrasah
andqawmi madrasah .Alia madrasahs combine religious education with mainstream education in
Bangladesh. Unlike the alia madrasah ,qawmi madrasahs run autonomously without any influence
from the government. Some alia madrasahs and most qawmi madrasahs offer accommodation, food,
and other necessities to the students who require them.
Besides imams and other logistic supports, all mosques have a local functional administrative
committee. People in the neighborhood voluntarily serve in these committees. Madrasahs and
orphanages are often co-located and operate jointly in Kushtia. They have both residential and
non-residential teachers. The madrasahs and mosques are usually run by community funding;
however, sometimes they receive government and non-government funds, too.
5 FINDINGS
We start our findings by informing the kinds of motivation that exist in Islamic religious communities
for their behaviors that eventually turn into habits. Along with the motivations, we provide examples
of cues and triggers that drive people in the community to perform their behaviors and maintain
their habits over time through religious control and restrictions.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:12 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
5.1 Motivation and Triggers
Motivations and cues for sustainable behaviors in Islamic communities root back to the love of the
God and His messengers. Islamic religious motivations emerge from the Quran, Hadith, prophet
and his companions’ lifestyle, and ulemas suggestions based on Islamic holy books.
5.1.1 Education with Spirituality. Islamic leaders and educators emphasize effective education for
environmental awareness and positive behavior towards the environment. They do not see the
environment as a discrete item of attention, rather as embedded in the other aspects of life. As with
other religious activities, the motivation for doing something for the environment starts with the
awareness about it. A 30-year-old imam was explaining this:
People are busy with their life; they don’t have much time to study [holy books]. Now,
if one does not know what happens to the environment when they cut a tree, they will
simply do that whenever necessary. Doing something positive starts from knowing
what is positive, right?
The imam then extends that this awareness of the environment is ultimately to please Allah.
The care for the environment comes from caring Allah,
As a Muslim, everything you do in this life is an ibadah .Ibadah is not merely saying
prayers or fasting during Ramadan, etc. Rather observing Allah’s order in every aspect
of your life. This is true that Allah has created everything in this world for your need.
That does not mean that He has given you the permission to misuse natural resources.
If you do that, you are actually engaged in sinful activities. People should know this
distinction of use and misuse of natural elements.
We have observed programs for educating people both in formal and informal settings, such
as mosque khutbah , morning schools, orphanages, madrasahs , and jamat . One common aspect of
Islamic education is mixing spirituality with information. Rather than just delivering information,
Islamic educators are motivated to fit the information into Islamic rhetoric and everyday practices
with a goal for broader gains in this life and afterlife. During jummah prayer, we have seen imams
often picking up Islamic poets, songs, or even stand up jokes to highlight spiritual aspects of a
particular topic. A 43-year-old madrasah teacher was explaining this:
Think about the mainstream education. All forms of education are good. Students know
and become aware of the society and the surrounding. But what is missing from the
other kinds of education is the teaching about purifying the soul. You know, planting a
tree is good for the environment, but what matters more to me as a Muslim is planting
a tree is also a sadaqah jariyah (continuous charity)4, when people will be eating fruits
from that tree. We do this [plant tree] in the madrasah . We give special attention to
how people should live with moral and ethical regulations with the purity of their soul.
The teacher continues:
When you die, there will be nothing that will follow you except for a few things.
Sadaqah jariyah is one of them. How much does it cost for you to plant a tree? Whenever
someone gets fruits or even shade from the tree, you will continuously get blessing
from the tree until the day of resurrection. Now, you do the math.
Combining scientific and social knowledge with divine interests helps people put the information
into the perspective of their lived experiences. As a result, our participants can make more sense of
the information and act accordingly with greater motivation.
4sadaqah jariyah is continuous or running charity. When a charity is made repeatedly, that is called sadaqah jariyah. [5]
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:13
Our findings demonstrate that Islamic educators are not confining themselves to religious
scholarships, rather extending their knowledge to include modern science. This has been made
possible due to their easy access to the Internet. It was common in our study that mosque clerics
informed us about their social media usage in seeking good sources of both religious and scientific
information. Some of them listened to YouTube videos to keep up with contemporary issues. While
preaching, imams make references to scientific sources as they think their arguments become more
convincing to the youth. One young imam (23-year-old) was explaining their interest for scientific
sources to us:
You have to understand people in the community. They won’t believe anything and
everything I say. I have to understand the [scientific] way they perceive and believe
things. I don’t see it [scientific] as unnecessary and irrelevant at all. Science says that
the tree gives us oxygen. Can you present evidence [from the Quran or Hadith] that
it is false? If not false, what’s wrong referring to this. Maybe there are imams that
hate science just because they don’t know enough. Or there are people [with scientific
values] out there, who mock religion comparing to science that might make many of
us [imams ] hostile to science in turn.
Although people in religious institutions show their interests in using technologies to keep them
up to date, they sometimes struggle with use of the Internet and other applications of their mobile
phones. The difficulty arises from the limited knowledge of the English language. People in Islamic
institutions are more proficient in Arabic and Bengali than English. Although three participants
were proficient in English language, the rest of them were not. The Arabic language is a “holy”
language to them as the Quran is written in Arabic. So, when our participants search something,
they usually attempt to search in Arabic because of their bias for the language. When they fail, they
try Bengali. As most of the resources in the Internet are in English, our participants often report
their experience of searching as frustrating. Below is an excerpt from our ethnographic notebook
that shows the frustration of a 32-year-old participant who is a madrasah teacher:
He is trying to explain to me the environmental activism of a British Islamic orga-
nization, but he does not remember the name now. He tried to remember the same
institution while preparing for one of his classes, but failed to find anything on the
Internet. He takes his phone [a smartphone with updated features] and opens an app.
“What app is this?” I asked. “This is an app where you can search in Arabic. You can
also search [contents] from the Quran and Hadith here. ” He said. I asked, “Can you not
search on [a popular search engine]?” “Yes, but I seldom find useful things there. They
are probably not for me, they are for modern people. But the good thing is, there are
some other apps, where you can search in Arabic.”
In summary, religious educators and leaders stress on combining information with divine spirits.
The information becomes valuable to the Islamic communities when it is expressed through a tone
of divine spirit. To Islamic communities, love of this universe emerges from the love of Allah. When
a piece of information holds this spiritual element of love for Allah, the motivation among people
to remember the information is strong enough to potentially drive them towards positive behavior.
5.1.2 Sadaqah Jariyah. Sadaqah jariyah is an Islamic concept where someone makes continuous
charity. The traditional concept of charity is either related to material givings or voluntary help for
others. In Islamic principles, sadaqah jariyah is not limited to material givings or volunteerism, but
also extend to deeds in various forms. Our participants reminded us that this form of charity is not
motivated by an immediate pleasant feeling; rather it is to benefit them after their death. Twelve
participants referred us to the following Hadith,
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:14 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, “When a man dies, his deeds come to an end except for three
things: Sadaqah Jariyah (ceaseless charity); a knowledge which is beneficial, and a virtuous descendant
who prays for him (for the deceased). ” (Muslim)
Our findings show that sadaqah jariayah is a concept that is strongly related to the goal of sus-
tainability. This notion motivates our participants to be involved in ceaseless sustainable practices.
Participants do not only make this kind of charity for their own religious gain, but also for their
close family and friends. In each orphanage, we found that funding came from outside sources,
mostly from the offspring of deceased persons; who believed their parents would be rewarded for
caring for the sustenance of orphans. One whole floor for the accommodation of orphans was made
by a singular mosque member (47-year-old), who believed that this donation would be worthwhile
for his departed wife. The person was describing his motivation for this:
I am an old man now. My wife is no more on this earth. I miss her so much. What can I
do for her other than praying and making arrangements so that other people pray for
her! As long as the orphans study the Quran here, my wife will be blessed. It’s like,
you opened an unlimited account for prayers.
During our fieldwork, we have seen examples of people building community facilities, such
as public toilets, garbage, water facilities, etc. They tend to believe that as long as people will be
benefited from their constructions, they will be rewarded in the hereafter. Two madrasahs informed
that they had donors this year to plant fruit trees on the premises. Their hope is that when orphans
and other madrasah students will eat food from the trees, they will obtain reward in the form of
sadaqah jariyah . One mosque in a neighborhood set up a drinking water dispenser right outside
of the mosque premise. The imam of the mosque explained that as long as people drink clean
water from the dispenser, Allah will continue giving neki to the donor that will help him go to
heaven after his death. The above and other forms of charity often come in secret from donors. As
described by an imam , people often do such charitable works to help poor and underprivileged
people in secret as rewards are multiplied in Islam when a good deed is performed in confidence.
5.1.3 Social Acceptance. People with a simple lifestyle are respected in our studied communities.
Despite being wealthy and prosperous, many people choose to adopt simple living out of their
divine motivations. They maintain a close ties with mosques and other social organizations. We
have seen them offering their services to the local mosque committees. Other people in the mosque
community follow people with simple lifestyles as role models in their own life. People seek out
advice on their social, political, professional, and even personal issues from the people with a simple
lifestyle. Social image works both as a source of motivation and trigger to initiate behaviors in
society. A 42-year-old community member was talking about such a person with a simple lifestyle:
Look at him [pointing to a person who is familiar as a wealthy person, despite have
a simple lifestyle], any egotism or narcissism? He is all settled in his life; educated
sons and daughters are all doing great jobs. He himself has a lot of wealth. Did you
understand this when you saw him first? You will see him helping everyone in this
neighborhood. We all love him.
To emphasize the simple lifestyle and its social significance, an imam was giving us the example
of the life of prophet Muhammad (pbuh):
Do you know what kind of life our prophet lived? Despite being the ruler in the Arab,
he used to live in a house made from palm tree leaves, would you do this? We, as His
followers, are supposed to live a simple life as he did. But we don’t do it; we spend as
much as we can. The people who really live a simple life despite having everything are
the real example of the greatest jihad .
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:15
Because of the simple lifestyle followed from Rasul (pbuh), it is a sunnah in the Islamic community.
This sunnah was closely observed by sahabis of Rasul (pbuh), many of whom were even rulers of
states. To observe this sunnah , participants suggested avoiding luxuries in eating habits, clothing,
housing, transportation, and other needs in their life.
5.1.4 Care, Cooperation, Collaboration, and Affordability. Even though Islamic institutions intend
to engage in social services, they often cannot do this alone because of their financial and infrastruc-
tural limitations. When NGOs and local governments take the initiative to partner with religious
communities on issues related to public health, disaster management, and environmental causes,
Islamic institutions welcome such collaboration to serve their communities. Because of the easy
access, quick response, and contextual actions, Islamic institutions are often the quickest parties
that the government reaches out to seek out help. Below is an excerpt from the field that shows how
mosques and madrasahs helped the government combat the Dengue epidemic in Bangladesh [ 125]:
The city is going through one of the most tense moments in recent times as the
outbreak of Dengue fever in Bangladesh hits a record number of patients. This week,
the government requested the Islamic Foundation, an autonomous body under the
ministry of religion, to issue a letter to appointed imams of mosques asking for help.
The letter requests imams to guide people in the community to clean up the mosques’
premises as well as the neighborhoods, and to address Dengue in the weekly Friday
sermon. The government also instructed to use the mic in the mosque to broadcast
precautionary and preventive measures in the community. Abdur Razzaque, a man of
nearly forty-five who oversees mosque affairs in Islamic Foundation, talked to us about
this, “imams will discuss this issue at length as well as help carry out clean-up activities.
This will not only be limited to this initial initiative; there will also be back and forth
follow-ups with the government. Allah gives us difficult times to test us. If we give our
efforts and belief in Him, He will help us. ”
Imams of the mosques showed a very positive attitude towards this letter. Five imams reminded
us that imams are supposed to be the leaders of a neighborhood who will guide people on a good
path [to Allah] and help the community when necessary. An imam informed us that he studied
about Dengue fever and its prevention online. He included what he had learned in his weekly
sermon. His lecture consisted of a few verses from the Quran that emphasize all the predicaments
that are taking place because of the mischievous deeds of human beings, an incident regarding
how the prophet’s companions grappled with plague epidemic, and some generic suggestions to
both prevent and recover from Dengue fever. The people in the community appreciated this effort.
During our study, we have seen several examples of religious institutions collaborating with
local and national organizations in tree plantation programs, cleanup activities after Eid-ul-Adha,
vaccination programs, pest control campaigns, and other social activities. The organizations work
as triggers for their motivation for engaging themselves with environmental causes. In addition,
mosques and other institutions provide the government and NGOs with complimentary resources,
such as community contacts, volunteers, facilities, and other logistic support.
The partnership with external institutions enables religious communities to perform social
activities with ease, ones that they are not capable of doing alone. On the other hand, despite
the strong motivation, people cannot organize all environmental projects. One mosque gave us
an example of their inability to launch a communal waste cleaning program. In Kushtia, there
are communal spaces that are shared by people. People show individual interests in cleaning the
spaces, but they also mention that cleaning up shared spaces is not one’s sole responsibility. A
mosque member was explaining this, “See, I cannot afford to clean it alone. If everyone involved in this
space comes, I am happy to work with them. ” The mosque committee demonstrated their interests
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:16 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
in organizing the communal waste cleaning program, however, they did not find an easy way to
bring together all individuals that share a common place and want to clean that space. They also
did not find a stable way of financing the program. We have often seen such examples where the
Islamic organizations fail to coordinate community-based environmental projects due to financial
limitations and lack of collaboration at the right moment ( [129] reports similar causes).
5.2 Habits
When people are motivated to perform a behavior multiple times, the behavior becomes a habit [50].
Many religious motivations lead to behaviors performed enough times to eventually turn into
habits [67]. When a habit is formed, the external forces or motivations to do the particular task
fade away [ 67]. For example, saying salam (Islamic greetings) is a very common habit in Muslim
societies. Before becoming a habit or norm, people perform it as a form of religious practice imposed
by Islamic regulation. For example, children are often instructed to say salam to people when
meeting them. As this behaviour is performed many times by many adult Muslims, it becomes an
habitual expression of greetings and norms.
Our findings show that people with religious values demonstrate many kinds of habits. The
habits are formed during childhood from and through family education, religious schools of various
forms, everyday interactions within their community, and Islamic texts. Our ethnography explores
different kinds of habits that have both direct and indirect implications for sustainability.
5.2.1 Building Habits During Childhood. Religious lifestyle is motivated by the spiritual belief
that good deeds will be rewarded and bad ones will be punished in this world and hereafter. Such
hope for rewards and fear of punishments encourage a sustainable lifestyle from childhood on.
Madrasahs , Trusts, and other forms of religious schools train people to build sustainable living
habits from childhood. Mosques and local madrasahs offer morning schools for neighborhood
children, which they call maktab . The schools offer a class from one to two hours. Children from
the mosque neighborhoods attend the schools. The morning schools are free; however, students are
encouraged to donate a small amount of money for operational purposes. The morning schools play
a vital role in introducing Islamic values and creating values on the environment among children.
A 40-year-old madrasah teacher was talking about the morning school:
Look at the children, they are less than six years old. The madrasah [he meant a
temporary morning school in a mosque] starts from 6 am. The children wake up at
that time, sometimes pray with their parents, and then they come to the mosque. We
have an assembly for physical activities. Here, they understand the importance of a
healthy and routine lifestyle. In school, besides Quran and Hadith, we teach them duas
for activities along with the meaning and significance of the duas, say duafor ablution,
bath, etc. The significance of duas are what they appeal you to understand, the praise
of Allah and his all creatures. When we teach them [the children] the activities, we
also stress the aspects of resource consumption, wastage, say, they cannot use more
than one liter of water for the ablution, this is sunnah . Children need to learn them
from their childhood. Whatever they learn now, will persist forever. If we perform the
same activity, we will eventually carry that throughout our life.
As described, religious educators and trainers build these habits through performing the same
task everyday at the same time. This is similar to the process that Duhigg describes in forming a
habit [ 50]. Whenever the habit is formed, it takes less effort to perform it in the future. Religious
educators do not only restrict their training to the school, they often consult with the parents of
their students to reinforce the training of forming habits.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:17
5.2.2 Habits Through Rituals and Lifestyle. Religious communities emphasize building habits
through performing rituals and daily routine. Almost all of our participants referred to the idea of
performing five daily prayers to emphasize the importance of and way for building habits in Islam.
One imam was explaining this and its connection to environmental sensitivity:
Think about daily praying five times? Do you think it’s easy? No! It is never easy.
However, if you pray five times a day everyday, at some point it will be easy. Have you
seen people praying at running buses, and in other extreme situations? How do they
do that? Because, it has been their habit. This is similar for the consciousness of the
environment. Satan will always invoke you to spend more [money or resources]. You
cannot control yourself easily, humanity is made in this way. But you have to learn to
control your body and mind. It is a constant jihad with your mind. You have to build
your habits to do that.
Imams do not only suggest that people pray, but also that they come to the mosque and pray
with others in a congregation. Imams see this as a good way to make a very concrete routine every
day and allow people to plan other important tasks around this routine. They also see it as a habit
of building a healthy life.
The training of building habits happens through other rituals and practices among Muslims. We
followed a jamat , an Islamic preaching program where a group of people travel to a mosque other
than the one in their neighborhood. The group spends three or more days together and conducts
activities such as preaching, inviting people to Islam, conducting Islamic educational sessions, etc.
During this time, they cook their own meals. Below is an excerpt from our field-note from a jamat
that shows how Islamic assemblies reinforce habits of low consumption and low wastage:
It is two hours prior to the midday prayer. Aamir, Mr. Amin, the captain of the jamat
calls the person assigned to cooking today’s lunch. Two junior members that are
helping Mr. Amin are about to clean up and throw away the skin from a peeled squash.
Amir intervenes and asks for suggestions from other members to find ways to cook
them; one comes up with the idea of mashing it. Mr. Amin finishes the cooking and
joins others in the midday prayer. After that, they gather together, bring out some large
plates; four people can eat together from the same plate at a time. They eat together
in groups of four people from each plate. In the end, there was some leftover food on
a plate. Amir asks a member to finish that up; the member abides by the request and
finishes the food. Amir talks about it later to the group, “All praises go to Allah, He has
given us the ability to eat together. Food is very precious; you cannot afford to waste any
food; Allah says in the Quran that he does not like those who waste food...you will be held
accountable to Him in the judgment day if you do so. Not only you, talk to your family
members about this. Sit with your kids for meals, teach them not to waste anything. You
and your wife have the responsibility to teach this to your kids. If you don’t tell them the
right things to do, you are not playing proper roles as good parents. ”
The above examples and many others in Islamic communities show the building of habits through
prayers, meditation, social engagement, preaching, donations, volunteering, and fasting. Such habits
have direct connections to sustainable behavior such as building habits of less food waste, less
consumption of natural resources, resource sharing through sadaqah orzakat , and so on. The
intrinsic benefit of Islamic habits is that it is a form of continuous training to achieve a greater
control of the body and mind.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:18 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
5.3 Sustaining Habits through Control and Limit
The findings above show the formation of habits through motivations grounded in religious values.
The habits are further sustained through religious restrictions and control. The restrictions come
from Islamic guidance and are adapted in the course of the lived life in individual, social, and
institutional settings. Religious people show adherence to Islamic restrictions primarily for their
love of Allah. This control is further reinforced simultaneously through the fear of punishment and
in the hope of reward in this world and the hereafter.
5.3.1 Self-control. Our participants repeatedly invoked the idea of jihad to show the significance
of self-control in every aspect of life, including material consumption. A 27-year-old young Islamic
educator was explaining this:
Look, people misunderstand many things in Islam. Think about the word jihad ; a
meaning of this is control, you have to control yourself from committing sins, control
your mind from Satan, control from enjoying this-worldly luxury so that you go the
jannah to achieve your ultimate luxurious life. Think about your prayer time. Satan
will try to distract your mind from Allah; you have to keep trying to focus your mind
towards Allah. It is a lifelong process. Similarly, your mind will always wish to consume
more. If you get more, you will want even more. To save yourself, you have to declare
jihad with your own mind. This [self-controlling] is hard, but when you learn to do it,
Allah becomes happy to make your goal [of self-controlling] easier.
Participants described the Islamic obligation of fasting as a symbol of self control. During the
month of Ramadan, Muslims restrict themselves from food or drink of any kind, from the dawn to
dusk. With the primary goal of pleasing Allah, participants referred to fasting as means of showing
empathy to the poor who suffer from hunger. This obligation is not only about fasting, but also to
refrain from wrongdoing of all kinds such as telling lies, fighting, back-biting, and so on. When
people fast, they also perform the training of self-consciousness to refrain from such everyday
wrongdoings, which our participants referred to as an opportunity to control the mind and purify
it. We found some of our participants fasting during day-times even when it was not even the
Ramadan . Another example of material self-control is zakat . This is a mandatory obligation in
Islam, where people have to donate a percentage of their wealth to the poor. During the Eid-ul-Fitr
which was around the time of our study, we observed affluent people donating money and clothes
through mosque leaders. Islamic leaders often explain this obligation as a way of establishing equity
in society. We talked to a 37-year-old businessman in a neighborhood about this:
Allah has given me enough. Giving zakat is the best possible way to be grateful for
my wealth to Allah. Poor people take our money and pray for us with their whole
heart, what else could I expect! Allah is happy, so are the people who get the money
when they need it. Whoever is not giving the zakat even after being eligible is violating
Allah’s order. They won’t have barakah [Allah’s blessings] in their wealth.
Another form of divine control observed in our study involved digital technologies. Participants
in our study showed their concern for haram content in social media and other spaces in the
Internet. Encountering haram content is sinful for them, and thus, they have to use technology in a
controlled way. Participants reported limiting their technology use, or often abandoning technology
altogether for the fear of encountering haram content. However, we have found some participants
using adaptation techniques to avoid prohibited content online. The techniques include filtering,
ignoring, blocking, and making case-based justification.
Islamic ulemas often interpret holy texts to suggest case-based scenarios of technology use while
not violating any Islamic rule. For example, our participants mentioned a set of rules while using
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:19
social media, such as avoiding interacting with people of the opposite sex, seeing haram content,
etc. While adhering to such guidelines, they assert that the use of social media could also benefit
them. Besides dependence on religious holy books, Islamic leaders compare technology use with
their real-life habits involving Islamic obligations. For example, people explained that interacting
with the opposite sex online is similar to interacting with them in real life. Islam suggests refraining
people from wrongdoing and prohibited things in real life. Similar rules should apply while using
technology. A 45-year-old imam was providing his justification for using Facebook:
You are not supposed to stop [using Facebook] because there is a chance of encountering
haram . Islam suggests to refrain yourself from haram , not to stop doing something.
Whenever I see a female on Facebook, I don’t stay there; just what you do in real life.
Whenever you go to the street, you see women without proper veils. For that, do you
stop going to the street at all? [...] That is what is called ‘jihad’; controlling your body
and mind to keep yourself safe from wrongdoing.
5.3.2 Social and Institutional Control. Societies and religious institutions act as the second check-
point for self-control as well as setting social standards and measures. Madrasahs , specially qawmi
madrasahs and residential orphanages, impose strict rules on students’ daily activities. The students
follow a daily routine every day. All students–coming from both poor and wealthy background–are
treated equally according to madrasah regulations. No student is allowed to break any of the rules.
This institutional control teaches students the value of discipline, equity, empathy, self-monitoring,
and perseverance, among others. A 35-year-old teacher in residence gave us an example of mobile
phone and social media use in their madrasah :
All students here are under 16 years of age in this madrasah . This is a very important
time in life. Whatever habits, attitude they make, whatever they learn, everything...they
[the values] will persist in their whole life. Social media might help when they grow
up, but in this age they will misuse this and do haram activities.
Besides madrasahs , mosques also build a neighborhood culture that imposes indirect social
restrictions. Many forms of control come even without any influence from the mosque. Mosque
committees from several neighborhoods form a coalition with people in the community to deal
with issues related to waste management, neighborhood security, preventing gambling, among
others. For instance, people in one neighborhood used to throw garbage outside of the dumpsters,
but after a meeting in the mosque about this, community neighbors were given the responsibility to
track the people who do this. One committee member said to us after that, “you will not see them
[garbage outside of dumpsters] anymore. It’s not like people are policing each other; its the fear of
socially getting condemned.” As well, mosque neighborhoods often help local law enforcement
agencies with urgent local issues in order to keep the community safe and under control.
6 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In the section above, we have presented motivations, training, habits, and lifestyles that constitute
sustainable living in Bangladeshi Islamic communities. We have illustrated how the sacred spirit
shapes this lifestyle through a system of institutional and social training that turn behaviors and
actions into habits. Furthermore, we have shown how habits persist through Islamic controls and
limits. The findings show how sustainability is achieved through religious sacred motivations,
contextual cues, persistent habits, and social controls and restrictions. The study provides important
lessons for persuasion in particular, and sustainability in general. In the remainder of this section,
we discuss the key takeaways from our study with implications for theories and practices of
sustainability in CSCW and HCI.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:20 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
6.1 Rhetoric of Sustainability: Beyond “Modern” and “Rational”
6.1.1 “Modern” and “Rational” Rhetoric and their Limitations. Our study highlights the limitations
of the modernistic and traditional rhetoric of persuasion and sustainability to describe its presence
at the Islamic religious communities in Bangladesh. Persuasive sustainability in CSCW and HCI
is reflective of modern and rational values (save for a few exceptions) [ 29]. In a modernistic
framing, consumption is calculable , consequences of consumption are predictable through sensing
and measurement , and users are efficient and rational enough to take a decision based on an
optimization function done mentally. Modernistic logic, metaphors, and languages have shaped the
framing of sustainability, languages of the discourse, nature of theories and concepts, and solutions
to problems in a way that left little room for alternative arguments. As a result, the voices of the
people who on the margins and the ones outside of modern scientific and rational frameworks
have been silenced in sustainable CSCW/HCI studies.
Many studies in HCI4D and post-colonial computing have shown how modern assumptions
collapse when they are transferred to a region governed by different moral frameworks, spiritual
orientation, and local practices [ 9,83,105,141]. For instance, Sultana and Ahmed’s study of
witchcraft in health care practices explores tensions between modern science and faith-based
practices [ 141]. They demonstrate how the moral framework in rural Bangladesh is formed through
a communal harmony, which is different from the modern ‘secular’ and ‘universal’ ethics [ 141].
They suggest engaging with such communities with “alternative” rationalities along with the
modern scientific ones to be able to better approach the moral aspects in HCI. In line with their
suggestion, we engage with Islamic religious communities and others that likewise have alternative
values, metaphors, and languages of sustainability. We believe the inclusion of diverse rhetoric will
benefit sustainability research by providing a more robust political strategy. To this end, we discuss
below the characteristics of the sustainability rhetoric in Bangladeshi Islamic communities and
discuss how existing conceptual resources in CSCW and HCI could engage with this rhetoric to
advance the goals of sustainability.
6.1.2 Islamic Sustainability Rhetoric. The difference in rhetorical interpretation of sustainability
between our studied communities and the modern scientific ones is rooted in the difference
between moral prudence and religious moral actions. Religious moral actions are different from
moral prudence in that the former are related to pleasing the “sacred” (what Max Weber considers
assoteriology ) as opposed to the latter that refers to the actions one performs out of their own
judgment and interests [ 40]. For example, our participants often refrain themselves from over-
consumption out of the fear that their action would displease Allah. A non-religious modern
scientific person might do the same because of their care for natural resources. Both our findings
and existing literature show many examples of such differences in moral actions and consequently,
in the interpretation of sustainability in different groups.
Studies in ecological theology give us insight into how the rhetoric of sustainability is expressed
in Islamic communities. Islamic environmental ethics are rooted in three founding principals [ 60]:
1)tawhid (unity), that Allah has created the universe where everything is regulated with the
principle of unity, balance, and harmony, 2) khilafah (stewardship), that humans are the stewards
of the universe with the responsibility of conserving it, and 3) akhirah (hereafter), that humans
are accountable for their deeds that might lead to destroying natural balances. These founding
principals provide a base for the rhetoric in which Islamic environmental sensibilities are embedded.
Our study presents a rhetoric of sustainability through three components of communication
narratives (speaker, speech, and audience [ 116]). In this rhetoric, a set of speakers (e.g., educators,
holy books, ulemas , peer supporters, the amir in the jamat , preachers, imams ) holistically devise
aspeech of sustainability for their audiences (e.g., Islamic followers, mosque goers, students in
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:21
madrasahs andmaktabs , attendees of congregations, Islamic conventions). Islamic educators in
mosques and madrasahs , religious preachers, Islamic influencers, and older adults in the family
contribute to building people’s attitude towards environmental components. The Quran, Hadiths,
ulemas , and other scholarly resources play an active part in this attitude building. The learning
process trains one to be mindful of tawhid ,khilafah , and akhirah . This mindfulness is expressed
through a set of classifications in everyday life in the forms of halal andharam . The halal-haram
categorization guides what and how much natural resources are permissible to consume. We have
further observed Islamic rituals, values, and habits extrinsically and intrinsically contribute to
forming a sustainable lifestyle. We have seen people observing zakat very strictly during Eid-Ul-Fitr
in the community as they follow the Islamic regulation of sharing a percentage of their worth with
the poor. Many Islamic schools, orphanages, and mosques are almost entirely run by sharing of
community economy coming from such donations. The concept of resource sharing is related to
the colloquial campaign in Islam as “less is enough” and “share when you have more.” Overall, our
study explicates how Islamic environmental ethics, rituals, habits, lifestyles, and holy books dictate
how people discuss and interact regarding consumption, wastage, preservation, resource, energy,
and all other issues related to the environment–a rhetoric of sustainability that the modern and
rational version of it in CSCW in HCI cannot fully capture and mobilize.
6.1.3 Designing with Rhetoric. Previous research in HCI has shown a greater impact of technology
when a design reflects rhetorical aspects in a community. One example is the rhetoric of language.
Rifat et al. conduct a randomized controlled trial (RCT) to find the impact of two types of SMS
messages on donation collection in a Bangladeshi community mosque [ 127]. One type of message
embedded religious sentiments (with verses from the Quran, Hadiths, etc., that expressed the
importance of giving in Islam), and the other type expressed secular values (e.g., renovating or
building mosques, conducting community programs). They find that the message with religious
sentiments resulted in a greater amount of donation collection. It might be methodically challenging
to empirically measure similar correlations of rhetorical elements and their impact on achieving
sustainable habits, since evaluating sustainability itself is a challenging problem in HCI to date [ 124].
Nevertheless, our findings and previous research suggest that expression of sustainability problems
through a rhetoric beyond a modernistic and rational framing might have a greater impact on
technology intervention in communities where religiosity, spirituality, and other occult practices
play a dominant role.
CSCW and HCI can employ its existing conceptual tools as well as design new tools to prescribe
a diverse rhetoric of languages, metaphors, values, and ethics in designing for persuasion and sus-
tainability. For example, Pierce et al. [ 117] cite Cialdini [ 41] to discuss a concept called “descriptive
social norms” for interaction design aiming at sustainability. They give an example from Goldstein
et al. [ 63], where a descriptive normative message for reusing towels increased compliance use by
28.4%. A similar strategy (align with Rifat et al., too [ 127]) could be used to prescribe alternative
rhetoric in design explicitly. For example, an interface delivering a message “save energy, you are
Allah’s khalifah to conserve the universe” might be more appropriate for Islamic communities than
“save energy, energy is limited in the planet”. The former text represents an Islamic moral value,
whereas the latter represents “moral prudence”; the former is related to the “sacred,” whereas the
latter is more reflective of a rational value.
It is important to mention that designing for religious moral rhetoric does not automatically
make it irrelevant for modernistic rational values, or vice versa, given that their goals are often the
same sustainable behaviors and habits. In many cases, modernistic, secular, and religious goals are
not antithetical, rather they have confluences and can work together (see, for example [127]).
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:22 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
6.2 Designing for Sustainable Habits
Our study provides a unique culture of habit formation and persistence under a process of sacred
inspiration and social restriction. This habitual culture is starkly different from traditional models
of sustainability in CSCW and HCI. There are a number of commonalities in the way behaviors
and habits are characterized and designed for in persuasive sustainability. The focus in persuasive
technologies for sustainability has thus far gone significantly to achieving target behaviors by
deliberate actions, while only marginally involving identification, management, and persistence
of pre-existing habits. Traditional models of persuasion target non-contextual and case-specific
cues and habits for behavioral changes [ 96,138]. Habits are assumed to form through conscious
individualistic self-interests [ 49]. Designing for behavior changes and habits as such poses unique
challenges for Islamic communities and others likewise. We want to highlight two challenges
and suggest how our findings might help to overcome them. The first one concerns breaking old
habits to achieve a new one. Forming a new habit also means intervening in people’s already
existing habits. Breaking these pre-existing habits is challenging, as unconscious habitual behavior
is resistant to changes [ 118]. The second difficulty concerns persisting a newly formed habit. CSCW
and HCI’s technologies of self-tracking and reminders help in repetitive tasks, but often struggle to
maintain the habits long term. To overcome these two limitations in sustainable design, we borrow
three design suggestions from Pinder et al. to discuss along with our findings, aiming to support
and allow the persistence of existing habits of sustainability [ 118]: design for persistence, design
for multiple points of interventions, and design for reactance.
6.2.1 Persistence of Habits. Our study shows that event-based and social contextual cues work
better than universalized non-contextual cues for long-lasting habit formation. Sacred motivations,
proper timing, and social situation define the context for Islamic communities. Most traditional
persuasive interventions in CSCW and HCI are often solely dependent on technology without
proper attention devoted to the religious, social, or cultural contexts. In a context, where a change
in a habit or the persistence of a habit is dependent solely on the technical functionality of a
technology (such as reminder tools, self-monitoring devices, tracking technologies, etc.), and not on
the broader social and cultural context, the habitual behavior becomes non-persistent, culminating
in a broken habit [ 118]. To this end, CSCW and HCI resarch can use many existing concepts that
support persistence of habits in a religious community. For example, ‘opportunistic training’ or
‘incidental interventions’ can be used to improve contextual cues in existing technologies designed
for promoting sustainable behaviors [118].
6.2.2 Combining Technological Interventions with Social and Institutional Resources. Multiple points
of intervention that combine technological tools with social and institutional resources might
outperform technological intervention alone [ 118]. Our findings highlight the importance of social
support (and resistance at the same time) in forming and persisting a habit. While technological
intervention can help to introduce new habits, the social forms controls could be combined to
persist the habits. As our findings demonstrate, social enforcement comes both in the form of
appreciation and acceptance (simple living is exemplary in the community) as well as peer criticism
and divine fears (wasting more water than required during ablution is sinful, so others remind
each others about this). To facilitate such social enforcement, both technological interventions and
social organizations can work together in sustainability programs in CSCW and HCI. The goal
then is to design strategies that combine different parties into a coherent program to persist a habit;
in our case, combining social, sacred, and technological resources.
Islamic religious institutions around the world conduct local campaigns, organize movements,
and run projects to support environmental causes [ 43,126,132]. The activism demonstrates that
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:23
Islamic institutions already have a broad-scale impact on fostering pro-environmental behaviors.
This suggests that Islamic institutions such as mosques, madrasahs , and other NGOs could be active
partners in sustainable habit formation programs. In doing so, sustainability research can draw
from HCI4D literature on aspiration-based computing [ 147,148]. This strand of research argues
that technology can bring positive social change, where human resources, training, and aspirations
are already present. Following this, research in sustainability can identify Islamic institutional
motivations and forces – such as the mosques where sustainability is inspired among followers,
albeit in a separate rhetoric – and then make technological interventions to amplify their impact.
6.2.3 Reactance to Non-contextual Cues. Non-contextual cues may trigger the behavior of reac-
tance [ 118]. Inappropriate suggestions and a lack of personalization may damage the credibility of
a system [ 72,118]. Islamic communities often react when something goes against their religious
ideologies. Our fieldwork had cases where participants were marking many features of technologies
asharam . While in some cases, participants were customizing their use to avoid haram features,
others were abandoning the technology. For this, again, a careful evaluation of Islamic sensibilities
and language of expression is important so that persuasive technologies in CSCW and HCI do not
trigger the behavior of reactance. There is an instance from our ethnography where an imam was
discussing an advertisement that advised people to clean their surroundings to prevent dengue
fever5. He said, “see what this leaflet is writing. As if people have all the power now to prevent dengue
just by cleaning. This is shirk. Only Allah can prevent dengue. Allah has instructed us in the first place
to keep ourselves and our surroundings clean. It is part of iman. If we listened to Him, we might not
have caught dengue [fever]. ” This implies that a different framing of this message reflective this
imam’s value (such as, Allah instructs to keep your surroundings clean. Follow this and seek for
Allah’s mercy) might have a greater impact.
6.3 From Microeconomic Persuasion to a Divine Motivation
We are informed of the recent studies on misinformation in social media that show how “per-
suasion” is decreasingly looked upon as an aide for bringing positive changes. Because of this,
we want to bring this discussion back to CSCW and HCI. Instead of relying entirely on Fogg’s
psychological conceptualization of persuasion (that is is essentially a microeconomic model of
behavioral manipulation), we see benefit in a more theologically grounded version of it. We have
discussed ways to support and persist sustainable habits that already exist in the lifestyle of Islamic
communities in Bangladesh. Further, we have presented the unique rhetoric of sustainability in
Islamic culture with a discussion on how current resources in HCI and CSCW could engage with
that rhetoric. We believe a proper rhetorical appropriation (along with the associated faith) should
overcome many limitations of the existing models. Thus, our study provides a fresh pathway for
persuasion to broaden its scope and avoid the fate of microeconomic failures.
6.4 Reconciliation of Science and Religion
More broadly, our work joins an increasing trend of reconciliation between religion and science.
Before advancing this discussion, we want to emphasize and caution that the findings reported in
this paper are based on a study of Bangladeshi Sunni Muslims. Literature in ecological theology
and our findings suggest that religion can open up positive avenues to advance the goals of
sustainability in CSCW and HCI. Despite this, we offer our contributions in this paper as suggestive.
We recommend that more research is necessary in diverse religious ideologies, contexts, and
cultures before considering their partnership with technology projects involving sustainability.
5There was a Dengue outbreak around the same time we conducted our study in Bangladesh
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:24 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
With this reservation, we have the following insights gleaned from our ethnography with Islamic
communities that might be relevant to religion in general.
In the pre-modern age, science, arts, and religion went hand in hand, having mutual connections
and exchanging powers with each other. With the introduction of “modernity”, there has been a
differentiation of science, arts, and moral systems [ 161]. In the present day, as Wilbert explains,
science has been established as an avenue for objective truth that cannot provide meanings. On
the other hand, religion has found its place in creating meanings and values in society, but at
the same time lost its access to public spheres [ 19]. While the disconnection between the two
spheres–science and religion–has brought many positive social changes, it is also accompanied by
dissociation, alienation, or even dissolution of moral values in “scientific” artifacts. Technological
systems in HCI have also demonstrated many examples of easing or aiding moral degradation [ 97].
To bring a balance of religious and modern values, scholars suggest a “marriage” between science
and religion [ 161]. HCI suggests similar integration of ethical and moral values in technological
systems [ 22,26,140]. Our study joins this call by recommending the consideration of religious
values in order to learn from them and include them in technology design.
Our study attends to the recent discourse of political design in HCI [ 39,46,49] regarding its
connection to morality. The discourse has recently been advanced [ 141] by suggesting the finding
of consensus among groups with various value systems. By putting forth religion as a common
social interest, we support communal ties, cooperation, and collaboration; the values reinforced
through the process of social persuasion. There have been moderate efforts (e.g., [ 75,127,161]) to
merge science and religion, with varying success. Promoting individual and communal practices
through design and intervention in CSCW can advance this coalition of science and religion.
6.5 Religious Values and Pluriverses
We are aware that a discussion on religious values and corresponding recommendations in a
“modern” and “secular” space like computing may be confronted by two kinds of questions: (a)
how can such recommendations that are based on religious values accommodate secular (or even
anti-religion) values in the same society?, and (b) how can one reconcile contesting and conflicting
values of different other religions in the same social sphere? We believe that these two points are
necessary to be addressed to better situate our contribution to CSCW literature. We address these
two issues through the following arguments:
First, we recall the socio-religious definition of religion that we have used in this paper - religion
is not entirely defined by religious texts, but is also shaped, controlled, and reproduced by the
social and cultural contexts in which it is practiced [ 40]. This essentially means that society plays a
crucial role in the functioning of a religion. In a more practical version of it, we may point to the
case of Islam, and how it is practised in a variety of ways in different societies in different parts of
the world [ 131]. The Islam in Saudi Arabia, for example, is very different in practice from the Islam
in Bangladesh. Similarly, even within Saudi Arabia, Islam is practiced in different ways in different
communities. We argue that how a religion interact with non-religion or anti-religion (and vice
versa) largely depends on the social and cultural context, and not entirely on religion. Religious
recommendations are passed and enacted through a broader social and cultural value-system, and
hence the question of co-existence is only partially dependent on individual religions. Also, for
most religions, there have been historical evidences of co-existence that we can build on [ 92,152].
Second, socio-religious studies have long been studying inter-faith communication, co-existence,
and collaboration that ensures a negotiation between religions without losing their individual
values [ 2,59,100]. Many inter-faith activities encourage people from different belief systems to
meet, talk, share their opinions, dine together, and participate in different collaborative tasks.
Recently, Sultana and her colleagues have studied the witchcraft practices in rural Bangladesh and
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:25
showed how the witches can work with people from both the Muslim and Hindu communities [ 141,
144], which supports the findings of many ethnographic studies and the basis of many design
interventions in Bangladesh (see [ 8,11,13,71,142,143], for example). The witchcraft practices put
communal values over everything else, and through a carefully crafted rhetoric, the witches make
all villagers work toward a communal harmony. Post-developmental scholar Arturo Escobar has
similarly emphasized on ontological changes for making various ideologies co-exist [ 54]. His idea
of "pluriverses" is built on the craft of “meaning-making” that has an epistemological direction
toward ethical co-existence. We argue that it is possible to set such epistemological conditions for
sustainability through ontological changes.
Finally, what if religious values are against the sustainability imperatives? How do we marriage
the two in such cases? In fact, there is a strand of research that argues that religious cosmology
is the root of current environmental crisis. Most of such research is the legacy of the medieval
Historian Lynn White Jr. Based on a historical analysis of medieval Christianity and natural
elements, he argues that religious sacred texts and philosophies give humans the right to dominion
over nature [ 158]. His thesis has been echoed in multifaceted manners in many scholarships (see,
for example, [ 68,113,149]). White’s thesis has been criticized as methodologically flawed and
backdated as the thesis was proposed before religious environmentalism in many forms [ 87].
However, we note this skepticism with due seriousness. While a response to this skepticism might
be found in the shift of ontology and rhetoric that we have discussed before: a mechanism for how
the overarching social power creates a narrative that is both acceptable to religions and friendly
to the environment. However, this will still leave the claim that some religions establish human
dominance over nature. We believe that making a general comment about all religions goes far
beyond the scope of this work, and we can only comment on the Islamic practices in Bangladesh
as we have studied. Here, the practised Islamic values attribute the ownership of nature to the
God ( tawhid ), and destroying a small part of nature is considered as a sin. Also, those values and
environmental sustainability have so far been found to be aligned in most scenarios. However,
we agree that more context-specific research needs to be conducted to advance this investigation.
In cases where we find any misalignment, we believe that the society in question needs to come
forward to align those values to ensure a better future for this universe.
6.6 Limitations
Finally, we want to acknowledge some limitations of our study. We start by mentioning the limitation
of the generalizability of our study. Islam is a pluralistic religion. It has many interpretative versions
worldwide [ 131]. Even in the Indian subcontinent, there are several Islamic traditions [ 79]. We
conducted our study with Bangladeshi Sunni Muslims in an urban city. Although most Bangladeshi
urban cities hold similar community characteristics, there might be differences in ideological
traditions, resources, administration, and social structure elsewhere in Bangladesh. Because of this
pluralism in Islam and other religions, we don’t argue that our findings will generalize everywhere
in Bangladesh and outside of Bangladesh. Rather, we offer our contributions here as suggestive,
and open future work on other religious traditions in various geographic locations to provide new
insights into the intersection of religion and sustainability.
Finally, designing technologies with religious values may invoke value-level conflicting questions.
For example, there are complaints of gender gaps, inequality, and prejudices against the Islamic
religion. In this work, we neither engage with this discourse [ 14,23,36] nor make any claim to
present religion as good or bad (which goes beyond the scope of the paper). Instead, we see religion
as an origin of many individual and social values guiding many people around the world [ 40],
especially in the community where we conducted our study. Our goal with this research is to unfold
unique sustainability practices and suggest CSCW literature’s possible engagement through design.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:26 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank mosque, madrasah , orphanage, and Trust communities for their participation and co-
operation. Special thanks to our anonymous reviewers from CSCW and CHI, whose constructive
comments helped to improve our paper. Thanks to Nafisa Anzum and Vlada Gorchkova for carefully
reading our paper and suggesting language edits. This research was made possible by the generous
grants from Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (#RGPIN-2018-0), Social Sci-
ences and Humanities Research Council (#892191082), Canada Foundation for Innovation (#37608),
Ontario Ministry of Research and Innovation (#37608), and International Fulbright Centennial
Fellowship of Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed.
REFERENCES
[1]Mohamed Syazwan Ab Talib, Lim Rubin, and Vincent Khor Zhengyi. 2013. Qualitative research on critical issues in
halal logistics. Journal of Emerging Economies and Islamic Research 1, 2 (2013), 131–150.
[2]Mohammed Abu-Nimer, Amal Khoury, and Emily Welty. 2007. Unity in diversity: Interfaith dialogue in the Middle
East. US Institute of Peace Press.
[3] Mumtaz Ahmad. 2008. Islam, state, and society in Bangladesh. Asian Islam in the 21st century (2008), 49–80.
[4]Mumtaz Ahmad. 2009. Views from the Madrasa: Islamic education in Bangladesh. The National Bureau of Asian
Research NBR project (2009).
[5] Habib Ahmed. 2007. Waqf-based microfinance: realizing the social role of Islamic finance. World Bank (2007).
[6]Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Nova Ahmed, Faheem Hussain, and Neha Kumar. 2016. Computing beyond gender-imposed
limits. In proceedings of the Second workshop on Computing within Limits . 1–7.
[7]Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Md Romael Haque, Jay Chen, and Nicola Dell. 2017. Digital privacy challenges with shared
mobile phone use in bangladesh. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 1, CSCW (2017), 1–20.
[8]Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Md Romael Haque, Irtaza Haider, Jay Chen, and Nicola Dell. 2019. " Everyone Has Some
Personal Stuff" Designing to Support Digital Privacy with Shared Mobile Phone Use in Bangladesh. In Proceedings of
the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–13.
[9]Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Steven J Jackson, Nova Ahmed, Hasan Shahid Ferdous, Md Rashidujjaman Rifat, ASM Rizvi,
Shamir Ahmed, and Rifat Sabbir Mansur. 2014. Protibadi: A platform for fighting sexual harassment in urban
Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2695–2704.
[10] Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Steven J Jackson, and Md Rashidujjaman Rifat. 2015. Learning to fix: knowledge, collaboration
and mobile phone repair in Dhaka, Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information
and Communication Technologies and Development . 1–10.
[11] Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Steven J Jackson, Maruf Zaber, Mehrab Bin Morshed, Md Habibullah Bin Ismail, and Sharmin
Afrose. 2013. Ecologies of use and design: individual and social practices of mobile phone use within low-literate
rickshawpuller communities in urban Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the 4th Annual Symposium on Computing for
Development . 1–10.
[12] Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Nusrat Jahan Mim, and Steven J Jackson. 2015. Residual mobilities: infrastructural displacement
and post-colonial computing in Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems . 437–446.
[13] Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Maruf Hasan Zaber, Mehrab Bin Morshed, Md Habibullah Bin Ismail, Dan Cosley, and Steven J
Jackson. 2015. Suhrid: A collaborative mobile phone interface for low literate people. In Proceedings of the 2015 Annual
Symposium on Computing for Development . 95–103.
[14] Anne Aly. 2007. Australian Muslim responses to the discourse on terrorism in the Australian popular media. Australian
Journal of Social Issues 42, 1 (2007), 27–40.
[15] Morgan G Ames, Silvia Lindtner, Shaowen Bardzell, Jeffrey Bardzell, Lilly Nguyen, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Nusrat
Jahan, Steven J Jackson, and Paul Dourish. 2018. Making or making do? Challenging the mythologies of making and
hacking . Technical Report.
[16] Morgan G Ames, Daniela K Rosner, and Ingrid Erickson. 2015. Worship, faith, and evangelism: Religion as an
ideological lens for engineering worlds. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work & Social Computing . ACM, 69–81.
[17] Paul M Aoki, RJ Honicky, Alan Mainwaring, Chris Myers, Eric Paulos, Sushmita Subramanian, and Allison Woodruff.
2009. A vehicle for research: using street sweepers to explore the landscape of environmental community action. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, 375–384.
[18] Ernesto Arroyo, Leonardo Bonanni, and Ted Selker. 2005. Waterbot: exploring feedback and persuasive techniques at
the sink. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM, 631–639.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:27
[19] Talal Asad. 2003. Formations of the secular: Christianity, Islam, modernity . Stanford University Press.
[20] David B Audretsch, Werner Boente, and Jagannadha Pawan Tamvada. 2013. Religion, social class, and entrepreneurial
choice. Journal of Business Venturing 28, 6 (2013), 774–789.
[21] William Sims Bainbridge and Rodney Stark. 1984. Formal explanation of religion: a progress report. Sociological
Analysis 45, 2 (1984), 145–158.
[22] Shaowen Bardzell and Jeffrey Bardzell. 2011. Towards a feminist HCI methodology: social science, feminism, and
HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, 675–684.
[23] James A Beckford. 1990. The sociology of religion and social problems. Sociological Analysis 51, 1 (1990), 1–14.
[24] Chetan Bhatt. 2020. Hindu nationalism: origins, ideologies and modern myths . Routledge.
[25] Eli Blevis. 2007. Sustainable interaction design: invention & disposal, renewal & reuse. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM, 503–512.
[26] Alan Borning and Michael Muller. 2012. Next steps for value sensitive design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on human factors in computing systems . ACM, 1125–1134.
[27] Vani K Borooah and Sriya Iyer. 2005. Vidya, Veda, and Varna: The influence of religion and caste on education in
rural India. The Journal of Development Studies 41, 8 (2005), 1369–1404.
[28] Becky J Brown, Mark E Hanson, Diana M Liverman, and Robert W Merideth. 1987. Global sustainability: toward
definition. Environmental management 11, 6 (1987), 713–719.
[29] Hronn Brynjarsdottir, Maria Håkansson, James Pierce, Eric Baumer, Carl DiSalvo, and Phoebe Sengers. 2012. Sustain-
ably unpersuaded: how persuasion narrows our vision of sustainability. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, 947–956.
[30] Elizabeth Buie and Mark Blythe. 2013. Spirituality: there’s an app for that!(but not a lot of research). In CHI’13
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, 2315–2324.
[31] Christopher T Burris, Nyla R Branscombe, and Lynne M Jackson. 2000. “For God and Country” Religion and the
Endorsement of National Self-Stereotypes. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 31, 4 (2000), 517–527.
[32] Heidi Campbell. 2007. ‘What hath God wrought?’Considering how religious communities culture (or Kosher) the cell
phone. Continuum 21, 2 (2007), 191–203.
[33] Heidi A Campbell. 2012. Digital religion: Understanding religious practice in new media worlds . Routledge.
[34] Heidi A Campbell and Mia Lövheim. 2011. Introduction: Rethinking the online–offline connection in the study of
religion online. Information, Communication & Society 14, 8 (2011), 1083–1096.
[35] Heidi A Campbell and Alessandra Vitullo. 2016. Assessing changes in the study of religious communities in digital
religion studies. Church, Communication and Culture 1, 1 (2016), 73–89.
[36] Jocelyne Cesari. 2009. Securitization of Islam in Europe. In Muslims in the West after 9/11 . Routledge, 19–37.
[37] Christopher Key Chapple and Mary Evelyn Tucker. 2000. Hinduism and ecology . Harvard University Press Cambridge.
[38] Kathy Charmaz. 2006. Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis . sage.
[39] Padma Chirumamilla and Joyojeet Pal. 2013. Play and power: a ludic design proposal for ICTD. In Proceedings of the
Sixth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development: Full Papers-Volume 1 .
ACM, 25–33.
[40] Kevin J Christiano, William H Swatos Jr, and Peter Kivisto. 2015. Sociology of religion: Contemporary developments .
Rowman & Littlefield.
[41] Robert B Cialdini. 2007. Descriptive social norms as underappreciated sources of social control. Psychometrika 72, 2
(2007), 263.
[42] Padmasiri De Silva. 2016. Environmental philosophy and ethics in Buddhism . Springer.
[43] Daniel Nilsson DeHanas. 2009. Broadcasting green: grassroots environmentalism on Muslim women’s radio. The
Sociological Review 57, 2_suppl (2009), 141–155.
[44] Tavleen Kaur Dhandra. 2019. Achieving triple dividend through mindfulness: More sustainable consumption, less
unsustainable consumption and more life satisfaction. Ecological Economics 161 (2019), 83–90.
[45] Mawil Izzi Dien. 1997. Islam and the environment: Theory and practice. Journal of Beliefs and Values 18, 1 (1997),
47–57.
[46] Carl DiSalvo. 2012. Adversarial Design as Inquiry and Practice . Mit Press.
[47] Carl DiSalvo, Phoebe Sengers, and Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir. 2010. Mapping the landscape of sustainable HCI. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM, 1975–1984.
[48] Andrew Dobson. 1999. Fairness and futurity: essays on environmental sustainability and social justice. (1999).
[49] Paul Dourish. 2010. HCI and environmental sustainability: the politics of design and the design of politics. In
Proceedings of the 8th ACM conference on designing interactive systems . ACM, 1–10.
[50] Charles Duhigg. 2012. The power of habit: Why we do what we do in life and business . Random House.
[51] Emile Durkheim and Joseph Ward Swain. 2008. The elementary forms of the religious life . Courier Corporation.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:28 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
[52] Onkar Prasad Dwivedi. 1990. Satyagraha for conservation: Awakening the spirit of Hinduism. Ethics of environment
and development: global challenge, international response (1990), 201–12.
[53] Richard Maxwell Eaton and Richard M Eaton. 1993. The rise of Islam and the Bengal frontier, 1204-1760 . Vol. 17. Univ
of California Press.
[54] Arturo Escobar. 2011. Sustainability: Design for the pluriverse. Development 54, 2 (2011), 137–140.
[55] Patrick F Fagan. 1996. Why religion matters: The impact of religious practice on social stability. Heritage Foundation
Backgrounder 1064 (1996), 33.
[56] Brian J Fogg. 1998. Persuasive computers: perspectives and research directions. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on Human factors in computing systems . ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 225–232.
[57] Brian J Fogg. 2009. A behavior model for persuasive design. In Proceedings of the 4th international Conference on
Persuasive Technology . ACM, 40.
[58] Marcus Foth, Christine Satchell, Eric Paulos, Tom Igoe, and Carlo Ratti. 2008. Pervasive persuasive technology and
environmental sustainability. In Proc Pervasive ‘08 Workshops .
[59] Yohanan Friedmann. 2003. Tolerance and coercion in Islam: interfaith relations in the Muslim tradition . Cambridge
University Press.
[60] Mohd Yaseen Gada. 2014. Environmental ethics in Islam: Principles and perspectives. World Journal of Islamic History
and Civilization 4, 4 (2014), 130–138.
[61] William W Gaver, John Bowers, Kirsten Boehner, Andy Boucher, David WT Cameron, Mark Hauenstein, Nadine
Jarvis, and Sarah Pennington. 2013. Indoor weather stations: investigating a ludic approach to environmental HCI
through batch prototyping. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM,
3451–3460.
[62] Philip Gilligan and Sheila Furness. 2006. The role of religion and spirituality in social work practice: Views and
experiences of social workers and students. British Journal of Social Work 36, 4 (2006), 617–637.
[63] Noah Goldstein, Robert Cialdini, and Vladas Griskevicius. 2008. A room with a viewpoint: Using norm-based appeals
to motivate conservation behaviors in a hotel setting. Journal of Consumer Research 35, 3 (2008), 472–482.
[64] Robert Goodland. 1995. The concept of environmental sustainability. Annual review of ecology and systematics 26, 1
(1995), 1–24.
[65] Robert Goodland and Herman Daly. 1996. Environmental sustainability: universal and non-negotiable. Ecological
applications 6, 4 (1996), 1002–1017.
[66] Leo A Goodman. 1961. Snowball sampling. The annals of mathematical statistics (1961), 148–170.
[67] Richard L Gorsuch. 1994. Toward motivational theories of intrinsic religious commitment. Journal for the Scientific
Study of Religion (1994), 315–325.
[68] Roger S Gottlieb. 2010. Religion and the Environment . Vol. 1. Routledge New York.
[69] Maria Håkansson and Phoebe Sengers. 2014. No easy compromise: Sustainability and the dilemmas and dynamics of
change. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems . ACM, 1025–1034.
[70] Thich Nhat Hanh. 2013. Bells of Mindfulness . Parallax Press.
[71] SM Taiabul Haque, Pratyasha Saha, Muhammad Sajidur Rahman, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2019. Of Ulti,’hajano’,
and" Matachetar otanetak datam" Exploring Local Practices of Exchanging Confidential and Sensitive Information in
Urban Bangladesh. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–22.
[72] Marja Harjumaa, Katarina Segerståhl, and Harri Oinas-Kukkonen. 2009. Understanding persuasive software function-
ality in practice: a field trial of polar FT60. In proceedings of the 4th international conference on persuasive technology .
1–9.
[73] Taj ul-Islam Hashmi. 1994. Islam in Bangladesh politics. Islam, Muslims and the Modern State: Case-Studies of Muslims
in Thirteen Countries (1994), 100–138.
[74] Naeemul Hassan, Manash Kumar Mandal, Mansurul Bhuiyan, Aparna Moitra, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2019.
Nonparticipation of bangladeshi women in# MeToo movement. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on
Information and Communication Technologies and Development . 1–5.
[75] John F Haught. 1995. Science and religion: From conflict to conversation . Paulist Press.
[76] Julia Hill. 2002. Mindfulness in the marketplace: Compassionate responses to consumerism . Parallax Press.
[77] Victor J Hinojosa and Jerry Z Park. 2004. Religion and the paradox of racial inequality attitudes. Journal for the
Scientific Study of Religion 43, 2 (2004), 229–238.
[78] Lara Houston, Steven J Jackson, Daniela K Rosner, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Meg Young, and Laewoo Kang. 2016. Values
in repair. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1403–1414.
[79] Ahmed Shafiqul Huque and Muhammad Yeahia Akhter. 1987. The ubiquity of Islam: religion and society in Bangladesh.
Pacific Affairs (1987), 200–225.
[80] Faheem Hussain, Abdullah Hasan Safir, Dina Sabie, Zulkarin Jahangir, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. Infrastructur-
ing Hope: Solidarity, Leadership, Negotiation, and ICT among the Rohingya Refugees in Bangladesh. In Proceedings
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:29
of the 2020 International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . 1–12.
[81] Laurence R Iannaccone. 1992. Religious markets and the economics of religion. Social compass 39, 1 (1992), 123–131.
[82] Samia Ibtasam, Lubna Razaq, Maryam Ayub, Jennifer R Webster, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, and Richard Anderson. 2019.
" My cousin bought the phone for me. I never go to mobile shops." The Role of Family in Women’s Technological
Inclusion in Islamic Culture. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–33.
[83] Lilly Irani, Janet Vertesi, Paul Dourish, Kavita Philip, and Rebecca E Grinter. 2010. Postcolonial computing: a lens on
design and development. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1311–1320.
[84] Jerry Jacka. 2010. The spirits of conservation: ecology, Christianity, and resource management in highlands Papua
New Guinea. Journal for the Study of Religion Nature and Culture 4, 1 (2010), 24.
[85] Steven J Jackson, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, and Md Rashidujjaman Rifat. 2014. Learning, innovation, and sustainability
among mobile phone repairers in Dhaka, Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive
systems . 905–914.
[86] TN Jenkins. 2002. Chinese traditional thought and practice: lessons for an ecological economics worldview. Ecological
Economics 40, 1 (2002), 39–52.
[87] Willis Jenkins. 2009. After Lynn White: Religious ethics and environmental problems. Journal of Religious Ethics 37, 2
(2009), 283–309.
[88] Willis Jenkins. 2013. Ecologies of grace: Environmental ethics and Christian theology . Oxford University Press.
[89] Willis Jenkins and Christopher Key Chapple. 2011. Religion and environment. Annual Review of Environment and
Resources 36 (2011), 441–463.
[90] Charlene Jennett, Ioanna Iacovides, Anna L Cox, Anastasia Vikhanova, Emily Weigold, Layla Mostaghimi, Geraint
Jones, James Jenkins, Sarah Gallacher, and Yvonne Rogers. 2016. Squeezy Green Balls: Promoting Environmental
Awareness through Playful Interactions. In Proceedings of the 2016 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction
in Play . ACM, 389–400.
[91] Olof Johansson-Stenman, Minhaj Mahmud, and Peter Martinsson. 2009. Trust and religion: Experimental evidence
from rural Bangladesh. Economica 76, 303 (2009), 462–485.
[92] Sultan Khan. 2013. Religious co-existence: Tolerance and contestation amongst Hindu and Muslim faith groups of
Indian origin in South Africa. Journal of Sociology and Social Anthropology 4, 1-2 (2013), 149–157.
[93] Sunyoung Kim, Jennifer A Senick, and Gediminas Mainelis. 2019. Sensing the invisible: Understanding the perception
of indoor air quality among children in low-income families. International journal of child-computer interaction 19
(2019), 79–88.
[94] Ben Kirman, Conor Linehan, Shaun Lawson, Derek Foster, and Mark Doughty. 2010. There’s a monster in my kitchen:
using aversive feedback to motivate behaviour change. In CHI’10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems . ACM, 2685–2694.
[95] Bran Knowles, Lynne Blair, Mike Hazas, and Stuart Walker. 2013. Exploring sustainability research in computing:
where we are and where we go next. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM international joint conference on Pervasive and
ubiquitous computing . 305–314.
[96] Bran Knowles, Lynne Blair, Stuart Walker, Paul Coulton, Lisa Thomas, and Louise Mullagh. 2014. Patterns of
persuasion for sustainability. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems . ACM, 1035–1044.
[97] Ann Lathrop and Kathleen E Foss. 2000. Student Cheating and Plagiarism to the Internet Era: A Wake-up Call,
Libraries Unlimited. Inc., Englewood, CO (2000).
[98] Joey J Lee, Eduard Matamoros, Rafael Kern, Jenna Marks, Christian de Luna, and William Jordan-Cooley. 2013.
Greenify: fostering sustainable communities via gamification. In CHI’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems . ACM, 1497–1502.
[99] Sharachchandra M Lele. 1991. Sustainable development: a critical review. World development 19, 6 (1991), 607–621.
[100] Harvey J Locke, Georges Sabagh, and Mary Margaret Thomes. 1956. Interfaith marriages. Soc. Probs. 4 (1956), 329.
[101] Jennifer C Mankoff, Eli Blevis, Alan Borning, Alan Borning, Batya Friedman, Susan R Fussell, Jay Hasbrouck, Allison
Woodruff, and Phoebe Sengers. 2007. Environmental sustainability and interaction. In CHI’07 extended abstracts on
Human factors in computing systems . ACM, 2121–2124.
[102] Willard G Manning, Emmett B Keeler, Joseph P Newhouse, Elizabeth M Sloss, and Jeffrey Wasserman. 1991. The
costs of poor health habits. (1991).
[103] Matthew Louis Mauriello, Brenna McNally, and Jon E Froehlich. 2019. Thermporal: An Easy-to-Deploy Temporal
Thermographic Sensor System to Support Residential Energy Audits. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, 113.
[104] Cees Midden, Teddy McCalley, Jaap Ham, and Ruud Zaalberg. 2008. Using persuasive technology to encourage
sustainable behavior. Sustainability WS Pervasive 113 (2008).
[105] Nusrat Jahan Mim and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. Others’ Images: Online Social Media, Architectural Improvisations,
and Spatial Marginalization in Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:30 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
Systems . 1–14.
[106] Mirijam Mock, Ines Omann, Christine Polzin, Wouter Spekkink, Julia Schuler, Vlad Pandur, Ambra Brizi, and Angelo
Panno. 2019. “Something inside me has been set in motion”: Exploring the psychological wellbeing of people engaged
in sustainability initiatives. Ecological Economics 160 (2019), 1–11.
[107] Aparna Moitra, Naeemul Hassan, Manash Kumar Mandal, Mansurul Bhuiyan, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020.
Understanding the Challenges for Bangladeshi Women to Participate in# MeToo Movement. Proceedings of the ACM
on Human-Computer Interaction 4, GROUP (2020), 1–25.
[108] Phoebe V Moore. 2017. The quantified self in precarity: Work, technology and what counts . Routledge.
[109] Michelle Murphy. 2017. The economization of life . Duke University Press.
[110] Maryam Mustafa, Amna Batool, Beenish Fatima, Fareeda Nawaz, Kentaro Toyama, and Agha Ali Raza. 2020. Patriarchy,
Maternal Health and Spiritual Healing: Designing Maternal Health Interventions in Pakistan. In Proceedings of the
2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–13.
[111] Maryam Mustafa, Shaimaa Lazem, Ebtisam Alabdulqader, Kentaro Toyama, Sharifa Sultana, Samia Ibtasam, Richard
Anderson, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. IslamicHCI: Designing with and within Muslim Populations. In Extended
Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–8.
[112] CBS News. 2019. Air pollution kills 100,000 Indian children every year, study says. https://www.cbsnews.com/news/
india-air-pollution-kills-100000-children-every-year-environment-study-says/
[113] Matthew Orr. 2003. Environmental decline and the rise of religion. Zygon ®38, 4 (2003), 895–910.
[114] Richard Osbaldiston and John Paul Schott. 2012. Environmental sustainability and behavioral science: Meta-analysis
of proenvironmental behavior experiments. Environment and Behavior 44, 2 (2012), 257–299.
[115] William H Percy, Kim Kostere, and Sandra Kostere. 2015. Generic qualitative research in psychology. The Qualitative
Report 20, 2 (2015), 76–85.
[116] James Phelan. 2007. Rhetoric/ethics. The Cambridge companion to narrative 14 (2007), 203–216.
[117] James Pierce, Diane J Schiano, and Eric Paulos. 2010. Home, habits, and energy: examining domestic interactions and
energy consumption. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1985–1994.
[118] Charlie Pinder, Jo Vermeulen, Benjamin R Cowan, and Russell Beale. 2018. Digital behaviour change interventions to
break and form habits. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 25, 3 (2018), 15.
[119] Alvin Plantinga. 2011. Where the conflict really lies: Science, religion, and naturalism . OUP USA.
[120] Pew Research Center’s Religion & Public Life Project. 2015. The Future of World Religions: Population Growth
Projections, 2010-2050. https://www.pewforum.org/2015/04/02/religious-projections-2010-2050/
[121] Pew Research Center’s Religion & Public Life Project. 2017. The Changing Global Religious Landscape. https:
//www.pewforum.org/2017/04/05/the-changing-global-religious-landscape/
[122] Pew Research Center’s Religion & Public Life Project. 2017. Muslim Population Growth in Europe. https://www.
pewforum.org/2017/11/29/europes-growing-muslim-population/
[123] Asha Rao. 2012. Managing diversity: Impact of religion in the Indian workplace. Journal of World Business 47, 2
(2012), 232–239.
[124] Christian Remy, Oliver Bates, Vanessa Thomas, and Elaine M Huang. 2017. The limits of evaluating sustainability. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Workshop on Computing Within Limits . 103–110.
[125] Reuters. 2019. Bangladesh struggles with worst outbreak of dengue fever. (Aug. 2019). https://www.reuters.com/
article/us-bangladesh-dengue-idUSKCN1UR4UQ
[126] Gillian Rice. 2006. Pro-environmental behavior in Egypt: is there a role for Islamic environmental ethics? Journal of
business ethics 65, 4 (2006), 373–390.
[127] Md Rashidujjaman Rifat, Jay Chen, and Kentaro Toyama. 2017. Money, God, and SMS: Explorations in Supporting
Social Action Through a Bangladeshi Mosque. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems . ACM, 5941–5953.
[128] Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat, Hasan Mahmud Prottoy, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2019. The Breaking Hand:
Skills, Care, and Sufferings of the Hands of an Electronic Waste Worker in Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–14.
[129] Md Rashidujjaman Rifat, Aysha Siddique, Azza Abouzied, and Jay Chen. 2016. From alley to landfill: Challenges of
and design opportunities for cleaning Dhaka’s communal trash. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference
on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . ACM, 9.
[130] Amir Saeed. 2007. Media, racism and Islamophobia: The representation of Islam and Muslims in the media. Sociology
Compass 1, 2 (2007), 443–462.
[131] Edward W Said. 2008. Covering Islam: How the media and the experts determine how we see the rest of the world (Fully
revised edition) . Random House.
[132] Arthur Saniotis. 2012. Muslims and ecology: fostering Islamic environmental ethics. Contemporary Islam 6, 2 (2012),
155–171.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.Religion and Sustainability 128:31
[133] Md Abdul Awwal Sarker. 1999. Islamic banking in Bangladesh: performance, problems, and prospects. International
Journal of Islamic Financial Services 1, 3 (1999), 15–36.
[134] Kenneth Scheve, David Stasavage, et al .2006. Religion and preferences for social insurance. Quarterly Journal of
Political Science 1, 3 (2006), 255–286.
[135] Miyuki Shiraishi, Yasuyuki Washio, Chihiro Takayama, Vili Lehdonvirta, Hiroaki Kimura, and Tatsuo Nakajima.
2009. Using individual, social and economic persuasion techniques to reduce CO 2 emissions in a family setting. In
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology . ACM, 13.
[136] Joachim H Spangenberg. 2005. Economic sustainability of the economy: concepts and indicators. International journal
of sustainable development 8, 1-2 (2005), 47–64.
[137] James V Spickard. 1998. Rethinking religious social action: What is “rational” about rational-choice theory? Sociology
of Religion 59, 2 (1998), 99–115.
[138] Katarzyna Stawarz, Anna L Cox, and Ann Blandford. 2015. Beyond self-tracking and reminders: designing smartphone
apps that support habit formation. In Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in computing
systems . ACM, 2653–2662.
[139] Sarah Strauss and Laura Mandelbaum. 2013. Consuming yoga, conserving the environment: Transcultural discourses
on sustainable living. In Yoga Traveling . Springer, 175–200.
[140] Norman Makoto Su and Erik Stolterman. 2016. A Design Approach for Authenticity and Technology. In Proceedings
of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . ACM, 643–655.
[141] Sharifa Sultana and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2019. Witchcraft and HCI: Morality, Modernity, and Postcolonial
Computing in Rural Bangladesh. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .
ACM, 356.
[142] Sharifa Sultana, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, and Susan R Fussell. 2019. " Parar-daktar Understands My Problems Better"
Disentangling the Challenges to Designing Better Access to Healthcare in Rural Bangladesh. Proceedings of the ACM
on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–27.
[143] Sharifa Sultana, Shaid Hasan, Khandaker Reaz Mahmud, SM Raihanul Alam, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2019. ’Shada
Baksho’ a hardware device to explore the fears of using mobile phones among the rural women of Bangladesh. In
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development .
1–4.
[144] Sharifa Sultana, Zinnat Sultana, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. Parareligious-HCI: Designing
for’Alternative’Rationality in Rural Wellbeing in Bangladesh. In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–13.
[145] Bronislaw Szerszynski. 2005. Rethinking the secular: science, technology, and religion today. Zygon ®40, 4 (2005),
813–822.
[146] Anja Thieme, Rob Comber, Julia Miebach, Jack Weeden, Nicole Kraemer, Shaun Lawson, and Patrick Olivier. 2012.
We’ve bin watching you: designing for reflection and social persuasion to promote sustainable lifestyles. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, 2337–2346.
[147] Kentaro Toyama. 2015. Geek heresy: Rescuing social change from the cult of technology . PublicAffairs.
[148] Kentaro Toyama. 2017. Design, needs, and aspirations in international development. In International Conference on
Social Implications of Computers in Developing Countries . Springer, 24–32.
[149] Arnold Toynbee. 1972. The religious background of the present environmental crisis: a viewpoint. International
Journal of Environmental Studies 3, 1-4 (1972), 141–146.
[150] Tali Trigg. 2019. Environmental Problems Beyond Climate Change - Business Insider. https://www.businessinsider.
com/environmental-problems-beyond-climate-change-2014-7
[151] Sonja S van Dam, Conny A Bakker, and JDM Van Hal. 2010. Home energy monitors: impact over the medium-term.
Building Research & Information 38, 5 (2010), 458–469.
[152] Peter Van der Veer. 1994. Religious Nationalism: Hindus and Muslims in India . Univ of California Press.
[153] N Varas-Díaz, TB Neilands, S Malavé Rivera, and E Betancourt. 2010. Religion and HIV/AIDS stigma: Implications for
health professionals in Puerto Rico. Global Public Health 5, 3 (2010), 295–312.
[154] Bas Verplanken. 2006. Beyond frequency: Habit as mental construct. British Journal of Social Psychology 45, 3 (2006),
639–656.
[155] Bas Verplanken and Wendy Wood. 2006. Interventions to break and create consumer habits. Journal of Public Policy
& Marketing 25, 1 (2006), 90–103.
[156] Roy Wallis and Steve Bruce. 1984. The Stark-Bainbridge theory of religion: A critical analysis and counter proposals.
Sociological Analysis 45, 1 (1984), 11–27.
[157] Max Weber. 1993. The sociology of religion . Beacon Press.
[158] Lynn White. 1967. The historical roots of our ecologic crisis. Science 155, 3767 (1967), 1203–1207.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.128:32 Mohammad Rashidujjaman Rifat et al.
[159] John Wihbey. 2012. ‘Green Muslims,’ Eco-Islam and Evolving Climate Change Consciousness. In The Yale Forum on
Climate Change & the Media .
[160] Wikipedia. 2020. Muslim world. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muslim_world [Online; accessed 31-May-2020].
[161] Ken Wilber. 1999. The marriage of sense and soul: Integrating science and religion . Number 120. Harmony.
[162] Austin M Williams. 2019. Understanding the micro-determinants of defensive behaviors against pollution. Ecological
Economics 163 (2019), 42–51.
[163] Allison Woodruff, Sally Augustin, and Brooke Foucault. 2007. Sabbath day home automation: it’s like mixing
technology and religion. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM,
527–536.
[164] Susan P Wyche, Paul M Aoki, and Rebecca E Grinter. 2008. Re-placing faith: reconsidering the secular-religious use
divide in the United States and Kenya. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems .
ACM, 11–20.
[165] Susan P Wyche, Kelly E Caine, Benjamin K Davison, Shwetak N Patel, Michael Arteaga, and Rebecca E Grinter. 2009.
Sacred imagery in techno-spiritual design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems . ACM, 55–58.
[166] Susan P Wyche and Rebecca E Grinter. 2009. Extraordinary computing: religion as a lens for reconsidering the home.
InProceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, 749–758.
[167] Aly J. Yale. 2019. Meet The Farm-Based Neighborhoods Changing The Face Of Master-Planned Communi-
ties. https://www.forbes.com/sites/alyyale/2019/09/12/meet-the-farm-based-neighborhoods-changing-the-face-of-
master-planned-communities/#53b8e5c3baa3
[168] Ray Yun, Azizan Aziz, Peter Scupelli, Bertrand Lasternas, Chenlu Zhang, and Vivian Loftness. 2015. Beyond eco-
feedback: adding online manual and automated controls to promote workplace sustainability. In Proceedings of the
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, 1989–1992.
[169] Mary Zey. 1992. Criticisms of rational choice models. Sage Publications, Inc.
Received January 2020; revised June 2020; accepted July 2020
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW2, Article 128. Publication date: October 2020.