Expressing Ethnicity through
Behaviors of a Robot Character
Maxim Makatchev and Reid Simmons
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Email:fmmakatch, reidsg@cs.cmu.eduMajd Sakr and Micheline Ziadee
Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar
Doha, Qatar
Email: msakr@qatar.cmu.edu, michelinekz@gmail.com
Abstract —Achieving homophily, or association based on sim-
ilarity, between a human user and a robot holds a promise
of improved perception and task performance. However, no
previous studies that address homophily via ethnic similarity
with robots exist. In this paper, we discuss the difﬁculties of
evoking ethnic cues in a robot, as opposed to a virtual agent,
and an approach to overcome those difﬁculties based on using
ethnically salient behaviors. We outline our methodology for
selecting and evaluating such behaviors, and culminate with a
study that evaluates our hypotheses of the possibility of ethnic
attribution of a robot character through verbal and nonverbal
behaviors and of achieving the homophily effect.
Keywords—human-robot dialogue; ethnicity; homophily.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Individuals tend to associate disproportionally with others
who are similar to themselves [1]. This tendency, referred
to by social scientists as homophily, manifests itself with
respect to similarities due to gender, race and ethnicity, social
class background, and other sociodemographic, behavioral and
intrapersonal characteristics [2]. An effect of homophily has
also been demonstrated to exist in human relationships with
technology, in particular with conversational agents, where
humans ﬁnd ethnically congruent agents more persuasive and
trustworthy (e.g. [3], [4]). It is logical to hypothesize that ho-
mophily effects would also extend to human-robot interaction
(HRI). However, to the best of our knowledge, no previous
work addressing the hypothesis of ethnic homophily in HRI
exists.
One explanation for the lack of studies of homophily in HRI
is the difﬁculty of endowing a robot with sociodemographic
characteristics. While embodied conversational agents may be
portraying human characters much like would be done in an
animated ﬁlm or a puppet theater, we contend that a robot,
even with the state-of-the-art human likeness, retains a degree
of its machine-like agency and its embeddedness in the real
world (or, in theatric terms, a “broken fourth wall”). Express-
ing ethnic cues with virtual agents is not completely problem-
free either. For example, behaviors that cater to stereotypes of
a certain community can be found offensive to the members of
the community the agent is trying to depict [5]. We speculate
that endowing non-humanlike robots with strong ethnic cues,
such as appearance, may lead to similar undesirable effects.
Some ethnic cues, such as the choice of speaking AmericanEnglish versus Arabic, can be strong, but may not be very
useful for a robot that interacts with multiple interlocutors in
a multicultural setting.
In this work, we argue for the need to explore more subtle,
behavior-based cues of ethnicity. Some of these cues are
known to be present even in interactions in a foreign language
(see [6] for an overview of pragmatic transfer). For example,
it is known that politeness strategies, as well as conventions
of thanking, apologizing, and refusing doﬁnd their way into
the second language of a language learner [7]. As we will
show, even such subtle behaviors can be more powerful cues
of ethnicity than appearance cues, such as a robot’s face. We
emphasize the integral role of behaviors in the expression of
a sociodemographic identity by referring to the combination
of a robot’s appearance and behaviors as a robot character.
The term culture, often used in related work, is “one of
the most widely (mis)used and contentious concepts in the
contemporary vocabulary” [8]. To avoid ambiguity, we will
outline the communities of robot users that we are considering
in terms of their ethnicity, in particular, their native language,
and, when possible, their country of residence. As pointed out
in [9], even the concepts of a native language and mother
tongue do not specify clear boundaries. Nevertheless, we will
describe a multistage process where we (1) attempt to identify
verbal and nonverbal behaviors that are different between
native speakers of American English and native speakers
of Arabic, speaking English as a foreign language, then
(2) evaluate their salience as cues of ethnicity, and, ﬁnally,
(3) implement the behaviors on a robot prototype with the
goals of evoking ethnic attribution and homophily.
First, in Sections II-A and II-B we outline various sources
of identifying ethnically salient behavior candidates, including
qualitative studies and corpora analyses. Then, in Section II-C,
we present our approach to evaluating salience of these be-
haviors as ethnic cues via crowdsourcing. In Section III, we
describe a controlled study with an actual robot prototype that
evaluates our hypotheses of the possibility of evoking ethnic
attribution and homophily via verbal and nonverbal behaviors
implemented on a robot. We found support for the effect
of behaviors on ethnic attribution but there was no strong
evidence of ethnic homophily. We discuss limitations and
possible reasons for the ﬁndings in Section IV, and conclude
in Section V.
978-1-4673-3101-2/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
357
HRI 2013 ProceedingsII. I DENTIFYING ETHNICALLY SALIENT BEHAVIORS
A. Related work
Anthropology has been a traditional source of qualitative
data on behaviors observed in particular social contexts,
presented as ethnographies. Such ethnographies produce de-
scriptions of the communities in terms of rich points: the
differences between the ethnographer’s own expectations and
what he observes [10]. For example, a university faculty
member in the US may ﬁnd it unusual the ﬁrst time a foreign
student addresses her as “professor.” The term of address
would be a rich point between the professor’s and the student’s
ways of using the language in the context. Note that this
rich point can be a cue to the professor that the student is
a foreigner, but may not be sufﬁcient to further specify the
student’s ethnic identity.
Since ethnographies are based on observations of human
interactions, their applicability in the context of interacting
with a robot is untested. Worse yet, dependency on the identity
of the researcher implies that a rich point may not be such to,
for example, a researcher of a different ethnicity. The salience
of behaviors as ethnic cues also varies from one observer to
another. In spite of the sometimes contradictory conclusions of
such studies, they provide important intuition about the space
of candidates for culturally salient behaviors.
Feghali, for example, summarizes the following linguistic
features shared by native speakers of Arabic: repetition, indi-
rectness, elaborateness, and affectiveness [11]. Some of these
linguistic features make their way into other languages spoken
by native speakers of Arabic. Thus, the literature on pragmatic
transfer from Arabic to English suggests that some degree
of transfer occurs for conventional expressions of thanking,
apologizing and refusing (e.g. [7] and [12]).
The importance of context has motivated several efforts to
collect and analyze corpora of context-speciﬁc interactions.
Iacobelli and Cassell, for example, coded the verbal and non-
verbal behaviors, such as gaze, of African American children
during spontaneous play [13]. CUBE-G project collected a
cross-cultural multimodal corpus of dyadic interactions [14].
In the next section, we describe our own collection and
analysis of a cross-cultural corpus of receptionist encounters.
The goal of our analysis is to identify behaviors that are
potential ethnic cues of native speakers of American English
and native speakers of Arabic speaking English as a second
language, to these two ethnic groups. We will further refer to
these ethnic groups as AmE and Ar, respectively.1Typically,
when creating agents with ethnic identities (e.g. [13]), the
behaviors that are maximally distinctive (a kind of rich points,
too) between the ethnic groups are selected and implemented
in the virtual characters. In this work, we propose an extra
step of evaluating the salience of the candidate behaviors as
ethnic cues via crowdsourcing. In addition to the argument that
differentiates rich points from ethnic cues that we have given
1We will also refer to the attribution of experimental stimuli, such as images
of faces and robot characters as AmE and Ar. The exact formulation of the
ethnic attribution item of questionnaires depends on the stimuli type.in the beginning of this section, such an evaluation allows one
to pretest a wider range of behaviors via an inexpensive, online
study, before committing to a ﬁnal selection of ethnic cues for
a more costly experiment with a physical robot colocated with
the participants.
B. Analysis of corpus of receptionist dialogues
1) Participants and method: We recruited AmE and Ar
participants at Education City in Doha and at the CMU campus
in Pittsburgh. Pairs of subjects were asked to engage in a
role play where one would act as a receptionist and the other
as a visitor. Before each interaction, the visitor was given a
destination and asked to enquire about it in English. Each pair
of subjects had 2-3 interactions with one role assignment, and
then 2-3 interactions with their roles reversed. The interactions
were videotaped by plain view cameras.
Among 2 Ar females, 5 Ar males, 4 AmE females and 1
AmE male acting as a receptionist, only one Ar male and
one AmE female were considered as experts due to current or
previous experience.
We annotated 46 of the interactions on multiple modalities
of receptionist and visitor behaviors. Three of the interactions
were annotated by a second annotator with the F-score of
0:88 being the smallest of the F-scores of temporal interval
annotations and transcribed word histograms.
2) Results: Due to the sparsity of the data, we limited
quantitative analysis to gaze behaviors. Nonverbal behaviors
such as smiles and nods and utterance content were analyzed
as case studies.
Two gaze behaviors that took the longest fraction of inter-
actions are gaze on visitor andpointing gaze (gaze towards
a landmark while giving directions). The total amount of
gaze on user grows linearly with duration and, contrary to
prior reports on Arab nonverbal communication (see [11] for
an overview), does not differ signiﬁcantly between genders
and ethnicities. Total durations of pointing gazes show more
diversity. In particular, male receptionists pointed with their
gaze signiﬁcantly less than female ones.
Analysis of durations of continuous intervals of pointing
gaze shows a trend towards short gazes (less than 1s) for
Ar receptionists, compared to the prevalence of gazes lasting
between 1 and 2sfor AmE receptionists. This trend is present
for both female and male subjects. Correspondingly, Ar re-
ceptionists tend towards shorter (less than 1s) gaps between
gazes on visitor.
The observed wide range of pointing behaviors, including
cross-cultural differences that are consistent across genders,
motivated our selection of the frequency and duration of
continuous pointing gaze as candidates for further evaluation.
We summarize our ﬁndings on realization of particular
dialogue acts below.
Greetings. Ar receptionists show a tendency to greet with
“hi, good morning (afternoon),” and “hi, how are you?” AmE
receptionists tended to use a simple “hi,” or “hey,” or “hi, how
can I help you?” An expert AmE female receptionist used “hi”
and an open smile with lifted eyebrows. An Ar male expert
978-1-4673-3101-2/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
358
HRI 2013 Proceedingsreceptionist greeted an Ar male visitor with “yes, sir” and a
nod in both of their encounters.
Disagreement. There are examples of an explicit disagree-
ment with further correction (Ar female receptionist with Ar
male visitor):
v8r7: Okay, so I just go all the way down
there and...
r7v8: No, you take the elevator first.
The expert Ar male receptionist, however, did not disagree
explicitly with an Ar male visitor:
r1v2: This way. Go straight.. (unclear) to
the end.
v2r1: So this (unclear) to the left.
r1v2: Yeah, to the right. Straight, to the
right.
The same expert Ar male receptionist distanced himself
from disagreeable information with another Ar male visitor:2
v3r1: I think he moved upstairs, right?
Second floor. [He uses dean’s office?]
r1v3: [Mm:: ]
according to my directory it’s one one
one zero zero seven.
Failure to give directions. On 7 occasions the receptionist
did not know some aspects of the directions to the destina-
tion. Some handled it by directing the visitor to a building
directory poster or to search directions online. Others just
admitted not knowing and did not suggest anything. Some
receptionists displayed visible discomfort by not being able
to give directions. On two occasions, receptionists offered an
excuse for not knowing the directions:
r6 (AmE female): I am not hundred percent
sure because I am new
r16 (Ar female): I don’t know actually his name,
that’s why I don’t know where his office
An AmE female (r15) used a lower lip stretcher (AU20 of
FACS [15]) and the emphatic:
r15v16: I have n.. I have absolutely no idea.
I’ve never heard of that professor and
I don’t know where you would find it.
She then went on to suggest that the visitor look up directions
online. Interestingly, the visitor, an Ar female v16, who pre-
viously, as a receptionist, used an excuse and did not suggest
a workaround, adopted r15’s strategy and facial expression
(AU20) when playing receptionist again with visitor v17:
r16v17: I have no idea actually. you can look
up like online or something.
The strategies, while not all speciﬁc to a particular native
language condition, appear to be associated with expertise and
perceived norms of professional behavior in the position of a
receptionist. In the following section, we evaluate a subset of
these behaviors for their ethnic salience. For more details on
the analysis, we refer the reader to [16].
2Square brackets are aligned vertically to show overlapping speech, and
colons denote an elongation of a sound.C. Crowdsourcing ethnically salient behavior candidates
Section II-A highlighted the need to further evaluate be-
havior candidates suggested by analyses of corpora on their
salience as ethnic cues. This section describes how we ap-
proach this task using crowdsourcing.
Crowdsourcing has been useful in evaluating HRI strate-
gies, such as handling breakdowns [17] and in cross-cultural
perception studies, such as evaluating personality expressed
through linguistic features of dialogues [18]. Here, we use
crowdsourcing to estimate cross-cultural perception of verbal
and nonverbal behaviors expressed by our robot prototype.
1) The robot prototype: We used the Hala robot receptionist
hardware [19] to generate videos of the behavior stimuli for
the crowdsourcing study and to serve as the robot prototype
in the main lab experiment described in this paper (Fig. 2).
The robot consists of a human-like stationary torso with an
LCD mounted on a pan-tilt unit. The LCD “head” allows for
relative ease in rendering both human-like and machine-like
faces, as well as various appearance cues of ethnicity that we
intend to control for in the following experiments.
2) Inﬂuence of appearance and voice: Ethnic salience
of nonverbal behaviors is expected to be affected by the
appearance and voice of the robot. Studies of virtual agents
have shown that an agent’s ethnic appearance may affect
various perceptual and performance measures (see [20] for an
overview). To control for the appearance of the robot’s face,
we ﬁrst conducted an Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk)
study that estimated ethnic salience of 18 images of realistic
female faces that vary the tones of the skin, hair and eye colors.
In the end, we chose face 1 (Figure 1), favored by both AmE
and Ar subjects as someone resembling a speaker of Arabic,
face 2, the face that was a clear favorite for Ar participants
and that was among the highly rated by AmE participants as
someone resembling a speaker of American English. Faces 1
and 2, together with two machine-like faces, face 3 and face
4, designed to suggest female gender and to minimize ethnic
cues, were further evaluated on their ethnic attribution using
two 5-point opposition scales (Not AmE—AmE, Not Ar—Ar).
Ar participants gave high scores on attribution of face 1 as Ar,
and face 2 as AmE, while giving low ethnic attribution scores
to robotic faces 3 and 4. AmE participants, however, while
attributing face 2 as clearly AmE, did not signiﬁcantly differ
their near neutral attributions of face 1, attributed face 3 as
more likely Ar than AmE, and did not give high attribution
scores to face 4.
We also pretested 6 English female voices (available from
Acapela Inc.) on their ethnic cues. Since voice cues are not in
the scope of our study, we decided to use one of the voices
that both AmE and Ar subjects scored as likely belonging to
a speaker of American English.
3) Measures and stimuli: The stimuli categories of greet-
ings, direction giving, handling a failure, disagreement, and
politeness were presented to MTurk workers as videos sharing
the web page with the Godspeed [21] questionnaire (with
items measuring animacy, anthropomorphism, likeability, in-
telligence, and safety) and two questions on ethnic attribution.
978-1-4673-3101-2/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
359
HRI 2013 Proceedings(a) Face 1
 (b) Face 2
 (c) Face 3
 (d) Face 4
Fig. 1: Faces 1 and 2 have high scores on their attribution as someone resembling native speakers of Arabic and American
English, respectively. Faces 3 and 4 show low ethnic attributions.
The ethnic attribution questions were worded as follows: “The
robot’s utterances and movement copy the utterances and
movements of a real person who was told to speak in English.
Please rate the likely native language of that person, which is
not necessarily the same as the language spoken in the video.”
The participants were asked to imagine that they were visiting
a university building for the ﬁrst time and the dialogue shown
in the video happened between them and the receptionist, with
the participant’s utterances shown as subtitles.3All stimuli
were shown with faces 1, 2, and 3. For Ar participants, the
task description and questionnaire items were shown in both
English and Arabic.
Greetings. Utterances “yes, sir”/“yes, ma’am” (depending
on the reported gender of the MTurk worker) and “hi” were
presented in combination with a physical robot head nod, an
in-screen head nod, an open smile, or no movement besides
mouth movements related to speaking.
Direction giving. A ﬁxed 4-step direction giving utterance
was combined with 6 different gaze conditions: (1) moving
the gaze towards the destination at the beginning of the ﬁrst
turn and moving the gaze back towards the user at the end
of the fourth turn, (2) gazing towards the destination at every
turn for 1:2s, (3) gazing towards the destination at every other
turn for 1:2s, (4) gazing towards the destination at every turn
for0:8s, (5) gazing towards the destination at every other turn
for0:8s, (6) always looking towards the user (forward). Gaze
switch included both the turning of the physical screen and
graphical eye movement.
Handling failure to provide an answer. Dialogue 1
included emphatic admission of the lack of knowledge, lip
stretcher (AU20) and a brief gaze to the left:3
u: Can you tell me where the Dean’s office is?
r: I have no absolutely idea.
Dialogue 2 included an admission of the lack of knowledge,
an excuse, and a brief gaze to the left:
u: Can you tell me where the Dean’s office is?
r: I don’t know where it is, because I am new.
Handling a disagreement. Two dialogues that do not in-
volve any nonverbal expression and vary only on how explicit
is the disagreement:
3An example video can be seen at http://youtu.be/6wA05CdFGUU .u: Can you tell me where the cafeteria is?
r: Cafeteria... Go through the door
on your left, then turn right.
u: Go through the door, then left?
r: No, turn right.
and
u: Can you tell me where the cafeteria is?
r: Cafeteria... Go through the door
on your left, then turn right.
u: Go through the door, then left?
r: Yes, turn right.
Politeness
The third direction-giving gaze condition (1.2s gazes to-
wards destination every other turn) was varied with respect
to the politeness markers in the robot’s utterances, such as
“please” and “you may”:
u: Can you tell me where the library is?
r: Library... Go through the door on your left,
turn right. Go across the atrium,
turn left into the hallway and
you will see the library doors.
and
u: Can you tell me where the library is?
r: Library... Please go through the door on
your left, then turn right. You may go
across the atrium, then you may turn left
into the hallway and you will see the
library doors.
4) Results: Each of the stimuli categories above was scored
during a within-subject experimental session by 16-35 MTurk
workers in AmE and Ar language conditions.4We tested the
signiﬁcance of the behaviors as predictors of the questionnaire
scores by ﬁtting linear mixed effects models with the session
id as a random effect and computing the highest posterior
density (HPD) intervals. A selection of the signiﬁcant results
is presented below.
Greetings. Although AmE workers rated the verbal be-
havior “yes, sir”/“yes, ma’am” higher on likeability and in-
4We limit Ar participants to those with IP addresses from the following
countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Morocco, Oman, Palestinian Territories, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria,
Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen.
978-1-4673-3101-2/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
360
HRI 2013 Proceedingstelligence, they gave it lower scores on AmE attribution.
Surprisingly, the same verbal behavior scored higher on AmE
attribution by Ar workers, but they did not consider it more
likeable or intelligent. Smile and in-screen nod improved
likeability for both AmE and Ar workers. However, AmE
workers scored smile, physical nod, as well as face 3 as less
safe, while Ar workers rated face 2 as less safe, and smile and
in-screen nod as more safe nonverbal behaviors.
Direction giving. AmE workers showed a main effect
of gaze 6 on increasing AmE attribution (primarily due to
interactions with face 1 and face 3) and on decreasing Ar
attribution. Both Ar and AmE workers scored all faces with
gaze 6 lower on animacy and likeability. Face 2 had a main
effect of lowering Ar attribution for Ar workers.
Handling failure to provide an answer. Ar workers rated
the no-excuse strategy as less Ar and as more AmE. AmE
workers found face 1 with an excuse as less safe. Ar workers
rated face 3 with no excuse as less likeable.
Handling disagreement. The explicit disagreement behav-
iors were ranked as more intelligent by AmE workers. Ar
workers, on the other hand, scored face 3 giving an explicit
disagreement as lower on likeability.
Politeness. Directions from face 3 without polite mark-
ers were scored as less likeable by AmE and Ar workers.
However, AmE rated polite directions from face 3 as less
intelligent.
Averaging over faces, behaviors, stimuli categories, and
participant populations, robot characters were attributed as
more likely to be AmE rather than Ar (M AmE = 3:90,
MAr= 1:70,t(5638:87) = 28:07, p <0:001). This overall
prevalence of AmE attribution is present within each of the
stimuli categories and within both AmE and Ar participants. It
should not be surprising, as all characters spoke English, with
the same voice. Interestingly, few combinations of behaviors
and faces showed differences in perception between the two
participant populations. Also, there were few combinations
of behaviors and faces that resulted in any shift in ethnic
attribution of the robot characters. For further details of this
analysis we refer the reader to [16].
Two main conclusions can be drawn. First, the ethnic
attributions of the faces shown as images were generally not
replicated by videos of the faces rendered on robots engaged
in a dialogue. Second, since ethnic attributions rarely differ
for these stimuli, other measures, such as Godspeed con-
cepts, become more useful indicators of rich points. However,
interpretation of the difference in Godspeed concept scores
across subject groups is not that straightforward. For example,
while AmE participants scored the robot with face 1, “hi,”
and a smile higher only on likeability, Ar workers gave
this combination higher scores also on intelligence, animacy,
anthropomorphism, and safety. Is the corresponding behav-
ior a good candidate for an ethnic cue? Even when ethnic
attributions are signiﬁcant, the subject groups may disagree
on them. For example, the verbal behavior “yes, sir”/“yes,
ma’am” has a negative effect on AmE attribution by AmE
participants, but a positive effect on AmE attribution by Arparticipants. This supports the idea that a behavior can be a cue
of ethnicity Awhen viewed by the members of ethnic group
Band not a cue when viewed by the members of Aitself.
We decided on whether to consider such behaviors as ethnic
cues by consulting with other sources, such as the corpus data
and related work. For some behaviors, however, the results of
this MTurk study were convincing on their own. For example,
we have chosen gaze 6 (no pointing gaze) as one of the cues
of AmE ethnicity for a followup study where the robot is
colocated with the participants, described in the next section.
III. E VALUATING ETHNIC ATTRIBUTION AND HOMOPHILY
The analysis of the corpus of video dialogues and evaluation
of behavior candidates via crowdsourcing allowed us to narrow
down the set of rich points that are potential cues of ethnicity.
We divided the most salient behaviors into two groups and
presented them as two experimental conditions: behavioral
cues of ethnicity 1 (BCE1) and behavioral cues of ethnicity 2
(BCE2). We hypothesize that these behavior conditions will
affect perceived ethnicity of the robot characters.
Ethnic attribution family of hypotheses 1Ar and 1AmE:
Behavioral cues of ethnicity will have a main effect on ethnic
attribution of robot characters. In particular, BCE1 will have a
positive effect on the robot characters’ attributions as Ar, and
BCE2 will positively affect the robot characters’ attributions
as AmE.
We also hypothesize that these behavior conditions will
elicit homophily, measured as concepts of the Godspeed
questionnaire and as an objective measure of task performance.
Homophily family of hypotheses 2A–2F: A match be-
tween the behavioral cues of ethnicity expressed by a robot
character and the participant’s ethnicity will have a positive
effect on the perceived animacy (2A), anthropomorphism (2B),
likeability (2C), intelligence (2D), and safety (2E) of robot
characters. Participants in the matching condition will also
show improved recall of the directions given by the robot
character (2F).
A. Participants
Adult native speakers of Arabic who are also ﬂuent in
English and native speakers of American English were re-
cruited in Education City, Doha. Data corresponding to one Ar
subject and 3 AmE subjects were excluded from the analysis
due to the less than native level of language proﬁciency or
deviations in protocol. After that, there were 17 subjects (7
males and 10 females) in the AmE condition and 13 subjects
(7 males and 6 females) in the Ar condition. The majority of
the Ar participants were university students (mean age 19:5,
SD= 1:6), while the majority of AmE participants were
university staff or faculty (mean age 26:4,SD= 9:2).
B. Procedure
Experimental sessions involved one participant at a time.
After participants completed a demographic questionnaire and
the evaluation of their own emotional state (safety part of
Godspeed questionnaire), they were introduced to the ﬁrst
978-1-4673-3101-2/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
361
HRI 2013 Proceedingsrobot character (Figure 2). Participants were instructed that
they would interact with four different robot characters by
typing in English, and were asked to pay close attention to
the directions as they would be asked to recall them later.
Participants were informed that, although the robot would
reply only in English, it acts as a receptionist character of a
certain ethnic background: either a native speaker of American
English, or a native speaker of Arabic speaking English as
a foreign language. Participants were asked to pay close
attention to the robot’s behaviors and the content of speech
as they would be asked to score the likely ethnic background
of the character played by the robot.
Interaction with each robot character consisted of the three
direction seeking tasks, with the order of the four characters
for each of the participants varied at random. Behavior condi-
tions BCE1 and BCE2 varied at random within the following
constraints: for each of the participants, pairs face 1/face 2 and
face 3/face 4 should be assigned to different behavior condi-
tions. This allowed for within-subject comparison of behavior
effect between two machine-like characters and of face effect
between a machine-like and a realistic character. The robot’s
responses were chosen by an experimenter hidden from the
user, to eliminate variability due to natural language processing
issues. Post-study interviews indicated that participants did not
suspect that the robot was not responding autonomously.
After the three direction-seeking tasks with a given character
were completed, the participants were given a combination of
the Godspeed questionnaire and two 5-point opposition scale
questions addressing the likely native language of the character
acted by the robot. All questionnaire items were presented in
both Arabic and English. Participants were also asked to recall
the steps of the directions to the professor’s ofﬁce in writing
and by drawing the route to the professor’s ofﬁce.
C. Stimuli
The independent variables of the study were robot behavior
(BCE1 or BCE2), robot’s face (1–4), and destinations and
corresponding routes for the ﬁrst dialogue (the professors’
ofﬁces). The combinations of the conditions were mixed
within and across-subjects.
Robot behaviors varied across dialogue acts of greeting,
direction giving, handling disagreement and handling failure
to provide directions. Combinations of verbal and nonverbal
behaviors for each dialogue act and behavior condition are
shown in Table I. The robot’s response to the user’s ﬁnal
utterance (typically a variation of “bye” or “thank you”) did
not vary across conditions and was chosen between “bye” or
“you are welcome,”5as appropriate.
The directions to the professor’s ofﬁces started from the
actual experiment site and corresponded to a map of an
imaginary building. Each route consisted of 6 steps (e.g. “turn
left into the hallway”) with varying combinations of turns and
landmarks. The landmarks were used in the template “walk
5The response to thanks was, erroneously, “welcome” for the ﬁrst 2 AmE
and 6 Ar subjects. We controlled for this change in the analysis.
Fig. 2: Experimental environment.
Dialogue act BCE1 BCE2
Greetings “Yes sir (ma’am)” +
virtual nod“Hi” +
open smile
Directions 0:8s pointing gaze at each
step + politenessConstant gaze on user
Disagreement No explicit contradiction:
“Yes, turn right”An explicit contradiction:
“No, turn right”
Handling
failureAdmission of failure +
brief gaze away +
providing an excuseEmphatic admission of
failure + brief gaze away
+ lower lip pull
TABLE I: The manipulated verbal and nonverbal behaviors.
down the hallway until you see a [landmark], then turn [left
or right],” once per route. Since we use the recall of directions
as a measure of task performance, the directions were pretested
to be feasible, but not trivial to memorize.
Each participant conducted 3 direction-seeking tasks with
each of the four faces (12 tasks overall). In the ﬁrst task,
participants were asked to greet the robot, ask directions to
a particular professor’s ofﬁce, and end the conversation as
they deemed appropriate. In the second task, the participants
had to ask the robot for directions to the cafeteria, and, after
the robot gives directions, which are always “cafeteria... go
through the door on your left, then turn right,” to imagine that
they misunderstood the robot and ask to clarify if they should
turn left after the door. The robot would then respond with the
disagreement utterance, corresponding to conditions BCE1 or
BCE2. In the third task, the participants had to ask the robot
for directions to the Dean’s ofﬁce, for which the robot would
execute one of the failure handling behaviors (see Table I).
978-1-4673-3101-2/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
362
HRI 2013 ProceedingsD. Results
Scores on the items of the Godspeed questionnaire and two
items of ethnic attribution were used as perceptual measures of
the robot. We use the success or failure of locating the sought
professor’s ofﬁce on the map as a binary measure of task
performance. Godspeed scales showed internal consistency
with Cronbach’s alpha scores above 0.7 for both AmE and Ar
participants. All the p-values are given before correction for
2-hypothesis familywise error for hypotheses 1Ar and 1AmE,
or 6-hypotheses familywise error for hypotheses 2A–2F.
Attribution hypothesis 1Ar. The data does not indicate
a main effect of BCE or faces on Ar attribution. However, a
stepwise backward model selection by AIC suggests a negative
effect of the interaction between face 4 and BCE2 on the
attribution (F [3;100] = 3:44, p= 0:020). The signiﬁcance
of the interaction terms between faces and BCE is conﬁrmed
by comparing linear mixed effects models with subjects as
random effects using the likelihood ratio test: 2(3;n =
120) = 9:48, p= 0:024. The 95% highest posterior density
(HPD) intervals for the coefﬁcient for the interaction between
BCE2 and face 2 is [ 2:14; 0:01] and for the coefﬁcient for
the interaction between BCE2 and face 4 is [ 2:07; 0:04].
While there is no evidence of a main effect of the faces, the
results suggest that with respect to the attribution of the robot
characters as native speakers of Arabic the participants were
sensitive to manipulation of BCE only for the robot charac-
ters with faces 2 and 4. Indeed, focusing on the conditions
with face 2 and 4 yields the effect of the BCE term with
2(1;n = 59) = 7:89,p= 0:005 and the entirely negative
95% HPD interval for BCE2 [ 1:19; 0:15]. Focusing on
BCE2 conditions, on the other hand, yields the effect of faces
with2(3;n = 60) = 9:60,p= 0:022, but all 95% HPD
intervals for the faces trap 0.
Attribution hypothesis 1AmE. The likelihood ratio test for
the mixed effects models supports the main effect of BCE on
the robot characters’ attributions as AmE, 2(1;n = 120) =
5:44,p= 0:020. Mean scores of the robot’s attribution as
AmE areMBCE 1= 3:62(SD = 1:21) andMBCE 2= 4:00
(SD= 0:92). The signiﬁcance of the interaction between BCE
and gender is 2(1;n = 120) = 4:14,p= 0:042. Controlling
for an additive face term, the signiﬁcance of BCE is 2(1;n =
120) = 4:88, p= 0:027 and the signiﬁcance of BCE and
gender interaction is 2(1;n = 120) = 5:02,p= 0:025. The
HPD intervals for the model’s coefﬁcients that do not trap 0 are
[0:20; 1:15] for BCE2 and [ 1:41; 0:02] for the interaction
term between BCE2 and males.
The negative effect of interaction between males and BCE2
suggests that the behavioral cues of ethnicity would have a
stronger effect among female subjects. Indeed, testing for the
signiﬁcance of BCE for female subjects yields 2(1;n =
64) = 8:74, p= 0:003. The effect of BCE on male subjects
does not suggest signiﬁcance.
The analysis supports the hypothesis that varying behavioral
cues of ethnicity from BCE1 to BCE2 has a positive effect
on the attribution of the robot characters as native speakers ofAmerican English. This effect is more evident among females.
There is no signiﬁcant evidence of a main effect of the faces.
Homophily hypotheses 2A–2F. Tests of the interaction
effects between the behavioral cues of ethnicity and the par-
ticipant’s native language do not support any of the homophily
hypotheses. We present below a selection of interesting results
showed by further exploratory analysis.
BCE2 characters were rated as more animate, 2(1;n =
120) = 6:00, p= 0:014. A combination of BCE2 and face
4 was signiﬁcantly more likeable, t(119) = 2:27, p= 0:024,
in particular for AmE participants. Relatively to other partici-
pants, Ar males gave the robot characters lower safety scores,
t(119) = 4:48, p<0:0001.
Task performance, in terms of success or failure of locating
the professor’s ofﬁce on the map, did not show any signiﬁcant
associations with the independent variables. For further details,
we refer the reader to [16].
IV. D ISCUSSION
The effect of behaviors on the perceived ethnicity of the
robot characters was more evident in the attributions as a native
speaker of American English rather than as a native speaker
of Arabic. The fact that the behaviors did have an effect on
attribution of the robot characters as Ar with faces 2 and 4
suggests that the manipulated behaviors were not just strong
enough to distinguish between native and non-native speakers
of American English, but also had relevance to the robot’s
attribution as Ar. The colocation of the questionnaire items for
AmE and Ar attributions, however, could have suggested to the
participants that these two possibilities are mutually exclusive
and exhaustive. The correlation between the attribution scores
is moderate, albeit signiﬁcant, r= 0:44,p < 0:0001.
An improved study design could evaluate only one of the
attributions per condition or per participant.
While behaviors may be stronger cues of ethnicity than
faces for robot characters, there is an evidence supporting
a potential of complex interactions between the two. One
explanation for the lack of the main effect of faces is a
potentially insufﬁcient degree of human likeness of our robot
prototype. Post-study interviews indicated that many partic-
ipants had difﬁculties in interpreting the ethnic attribution
questions in the context of the robot. It would be interesting
to replicate the study with more anthropomorphic robots that
could, potentially, more readily allow attributions of ethnicity,
such as Geminoid [22].
Other limitations of this study include the ﬁxed voice, with
a strong attribution as AmE by participants of both ethnic
groups, and the typed entry of user utterances. Some of the
participants missed the robot’s nonverbal cues as they were
focusing their gaze on the keyboard even after they ﬁnished
typing. We selected the typed, rather than spoken user input,
out of the concern that participants would not buy into the
idea of the robot’s autonomy, especially since some of them
are familiar with the prototype (although with a different face)
as a campus robot receptionist that relies on typed user input.
This concern may be less relevant for uninitiated participants,
978-1-4673-3101-2/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
363
HRI 2013 Proceedingsin which case an improved Wizard-of-Oz setup could rely on
spoken user input.
Only AmE participants’ data, only for some of the faces,
was consistent with a possibility of behavior-associated ethnic
homophily. The possible reasons for the almost complete lack
of any homophily effects in our data include (a) the highly
international environment, with most of the participants being
students or faculty of Doha’s American universities, and (b) a
potentially low sensitivity of Godspeed items and the chosen
objective measure to the hypothesized homophily effects. It
is also possible that the effect on ethnic attribution, while
signiﬁcant, was not large enough to trigger ethnic homophily.
There is, however, evidence that in human encounters eth-
nically congruent behaviors can trigger homophily even when
the ethnicities do not match (e.g. [23] and literature on cultural
competence).
V. C ONCLUSION
Achieving ethnic homophily between humans and robots
has the lure of improving a robot’s perception and user’s task
performance. This, however, had not previously been tested, in
part due to the difﬁculties of endowing a robot with ethnicity.
We tackled this task by attempting to avoid overly obvious
and potentially offensive labels of ethnicity and culture such
as clothing, accent, or ethnic appearance (although we control
for the latter), and instead by aiming at evoking ethnicity via
verbal and nonverbal behaviors. We have also emphasized the
robot as a performer, acting as a character of a receptionist.
Our experiment with a robot of a relatively low human likeness
shows that we can evoke associations between the robot’s
behaviors and its attributed ethnicity. Although we did not
ﬁnd evidence of ethnic homophily, we believe that suggested
pathway can be used to create robot characters with higher
degree of perceived similarity, and better chances of evoking
homophily effect.
The methodology of selecting candidate behaviors from
qualitative studies and corpora analyses, evaluating their
salience via crowdsourcing, and ﬁnally implementing the most
salient behaviors on a physical robot prototype is not limited to
ethnicity, but can potentially be extended to endowing robots
with other aspects of human social identities. In such cases,
crowdsourcing does not only help to alleviate the hardware
bottleneck inherent in HRI but can also facilitate recruitment
of study participants of the target social identity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This publication was made possible by NPRP grant 09-
1113-1-171 from the Qatar National Research Fund (a member
of Qatar Foundation). The statements made herein are solely
the responsibility of the authors. The authors would like to
thank Michael Agar, Greg Armstrong, Brett Browning, Justine
Cassell, Rich Colburn, Fr ´ed´eric Delaunay, Imran Fanaswala,
Carol Miller, Suhail Rehman, Michele de la Reza, Candace
Sidner, Lori Sipes, Mark Thompson, and the reviewers for
their contributions to various aspects of this work.REFERENCES
[1] P. Lazarsfeld and R. Merton, “Friendship as a social process: a substan-
tive and methodological analysis,” in Freedom and Control in modern
society. New York: Van Nostrant, 1954.
[2] M. McPherson, L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M. Cook, “Birds of a feather:
Homophily in social networks,” Annual Review of Sociology, vol. 27,
pp. 415–444, 2001.
[3] C. Nass, K. Isbister, and E. Lee, “Truth is beauty: Researching embodied
conversational agents,” in Embodied conversational agents, J. Cassell,
J. Sullivan, S. Prevost, and E. Churchill, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2000, pp. 374–402.
[4] L. Yin, T. Bickmore, and D. Byron, “Cultural and linguistic adaptation
of relational agents for health counseling,” in Proc. of CHI, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA, 2010.
[5] F. de Rosis, C. Pelachaud, and I. Poggi, “Transcultural believability
in embodied agents: A matter of consistent adaptation,” in Agent
Culture. Human-Agent Interaction in a Multicultural World, S. Payr and
R. Trappl, Eds. Mahwah, New Jersey. London.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Publishers, 2004, pp. 75–105.
[6] M. J. C. Aguilar, “Intercultural (mis)communication: The inﬂuence of
L1 and C1 on L2 and C2. A tentative approach to textbooks,” Cuadernos
de Filolog ´ıa Inglesa, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 99–113, 1998.
[7] K. Bardovi-Harlig, M. Rose, and E. L. Nickels, “The use of conventional
expressions of thanking, apologizing, and refusing,” in Proceedings of
the 2007 Second Language Research Forum, 2007, pp. 113–130.
[8] M. Agar, “Culture: Can you take it anywhere? Invited lecture presented
at the Gevirtz Graduate School of Education, University of California
at Santa Barbara,” Int. J. of Qualitative Methods, vol. 5, no. 2, 2006.
[9] D. D. Laitin, “What is a language community?” American Journal of
Political Science, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 142–155, 2000.
[10] M. Agar, The professional stranger: An informal introduction to ethnog-
raphy. New York: Academic Press, 1996.
[11] E. Feghali, “Arab cultural communication patterns,” International Jour-
nal of Intercultural Relations, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 345–378, 1997.
[12] M. Ghawi, “Pragmatic transfer in Arabic learners of English,” El Two
Talk, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 39–52, 1993.
[13] F. Iacobelli and J. Cassell, “Ethnic identity and engagement in embodied
conversational agents,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Intelligent Virtual Agents.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 57–63.
[14] M. Rehm, E. Andr ´e, N. Bee, B. Endrass, M. Wissner, Y . Nakano,
A. A. Lipi, T. Nishida, and H.-H. Huang, “Creating standardized video
recordings of multimodal interactions across cultures,” in Multimodal
corpora, M. Kipp, J.-C. Martin, P. Paggio, and D. Heylen, Eds. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 138–159.
[15] P. Ekman and W. Friesen, Facial Action Coding System: A Technique
for Measurement of Facial Movement. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press, 1978.
[16] M. Makatchev, “Cross-cultural believability of robot characters,”
Robotics Institute, CMU, PhD Thesis TR-12-24, 2013.
[17] M. K. Lee, S. Kielser, J. Forlizzi, S. Srinivasa, and P. Rybski, “Gracefully
mitigating breakdowns in robotic services,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on
Human-Robot Interaction. ACM, 2010, pp. 203–210.
[18] M. Makatchev and R. Simmons, “Perception of personality and natu-
ralness through dialogues by native speakers of American English and
Arabic,” in Proc. of SIGDIAL, 2011.
[19] R. Simmons, M. Makatchev, R. Kirby, M. Lee, I. Fanaswala, B. Brown-
ing, J. Forlizzi, and M. Sakr, “Believable robot characters,” AI Magazine,
vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 39–52, 2011.
[20] A. L. Baylor and Y . Kim, “Pedagogical agent design: The impact of
agent realism, gender, ethnicity, and instructional role,” in Intelligent
Tutoring Systems, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, J. C. Lester,
R. M. Vicari, and F. Paraguacu, Eds. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg,
2004, vol. 3220, pp. 268–270.
[21] C. Bartneck, E. Croft, and D. Kulic, “Measuring the anthropomorphism,
animacy, likeability, perceived intelligence and perceived safety of
robots,” in Metrics for HRI Workshop, TR 471. Univ. of Hertfordshire,
2008, pp. 37–44.
[22] H. Ishiguro, “Android science. toward a new cross-interdisciplinary
framework,” in Proc. of Cog. Sci. Workshop: Toward Social Mechanisms
of Android Science, 2005.
[23] A.-M. Dew and C. Ward, “The effects of ethnicity and culturally con-
gruent and incongruent nonverbal behaviors on interpersonal attraction,”
J. of Applied Social Psychology, vol. 23, no. 17, pp. 1376–1389, 1993.
978-1-4673-3101-2/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
364
HRI 2013 Proceedings