Sabbath Day Home Automation: 
“It’s Like Mixing Technology and Religion” 
Allison Woodruff 
Intel Research Berkeley 
woodruff@acm.org Sally Augustin 
PlaceCoach, Inc. 
sallyaugustin@yahoo.com Brooke Foucault 
Intel Digital Home Group 
brooke.foucault@gmail.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
We present a qualitative study of 20 American Orthodox 
Jewish families’ use of home automation for religious purposes.  These lead users offe r insight into real-life, long-
term experience with home automation technologies.  We 
discuss how automation was seen by participants to contribute to spiritual experience and how participants 
oriented to the use of automation as a religious custom.  We 
also discuss the relationship of home automation to family life.  We draw design implications for the broader 
population, including surrender of control as a design 
resource, home technologies that support long-term goals and lifestyle choices, and respite from technology. 
Author Keywords 
Domestic technology, family life, home automation, religious technology, smart homes, ubiquitous computing 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g. HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 
INTRODUCTION 
It’s Friday afternoon, and Trisha hurries to make a couple of last-minute adjustments to the X10 automation system in 
her home.  The Sabbath is about to begin.  During the 
Sabbath, which will last until Saturday evening, Trisha and 
her family will adhere to Jewish laws which prohibit them 
from manually turning electrical devices on or off.  Instead of operating devices themselves, they will rely on the X10 
system to control devices in the home.  Trisha has been 
using X10 for this purpose since 1985, and her system has become quite sophisticated – for example, it will control 
kitchen appliances, it will open and close the skylight, and 
it will execute a complex sequ ence of on and off commands 
for lights throughout the hom e (even the one in the fish 
tank, as Trisha’s husband believes the fish will only feed 
when the light is on).  But the system is not there to side-step observance of an empty ritual.  Trisha and her family 
aspire to spend the Sabbath in spiritual reflection.  They 
feel the X10 system helps free  them from mundane tasks and 
thoughts so they can focus on higher issues.
1 
This paper reports the use of home automation by 20 
families like Trisha’s, households of Orthodox Jews2 who 
have chosen to automate their homes for religious reasons.3 
The study has two primary motivations.  First, it has been a 
rare opportunity to examine long-term user experiences with smart home technologies.  The “smart home” [17] – a 
domestic environment capable of meeting and anticipating 
its occupants’ needs using sensors and computational “intelligence” – is a core trope  of ubiquitous computing 
research, but it is difficult to study.  Smart home user 
experience research generally takes place in purpose-built 
laboratories, e.g. [19,21], which offer limited opportunities 
to study the interaction of te chnology with the complex and 
dynamic social processes of family life [11,17].  By contrast, many Orthodox Jewish families have been using 
home automation for decades; as we will see even their use 
of pre-computational technologies offers useful lessons because they presage the capa bilities of more sophisticated 
smart homes.  This community of lead users therefore 
offers valuable insight into re al-life, long-term experiences 
with the use of home automation.  Second, as Bell and 
others argue, the use of technology for spiritual purposes is a highly significant and understudied area [1,26].  The 
Orthodox Jewish community presents a wonderful 
opportunity for a case study in  the use of technology for 
religious purposes. 
                                                          
 
1 This scenario is based on discussions with a study participant. 
Participants’ names as well as the name of the company referred to 
below as “RightSchedule” have been changed to protect anonymity.  
2 Jewish denominations vary by ritual and practice, with Orthodox 
(both Ultra- and Modern) being more strict than Conservative and 
Reform.  Estimates vary, but of the world’s Jewish population of 13 million, perhaps 2 million are Orthodox, including approximately one-half million in the United States [9].  Orthodox Jews as well as some Conservative Jews are observant of Sa bbath laws.  Some but not all of 
these use automation on the Sabbath (which is also referred to as Shabbos or Shabbat).  While our sample was comprised primarily of 
Orthodox Jewish families, and these practices are most strongly 
associated with Orthodoxy, some of the families we visited were affiliated with less strict denominations. 
3 We understand some readers may wonder whether this is a religious 
“circumvention” and we discuss this further in the body of the paper.   
Permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work fo r 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prio r 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
CHI 2007,  April 28–May 3, 2007, San Jose, California, USA. 
Copyright 2007 ACM  978-1- 59593-593-9/07/0004...$5.00. 
CHI 2007 Proceedings · Home Spirituality April 28-May 3, 2007 · San Jose, CA, USA
 527While our investigation covered a wide range of topics, we 
focused in particular on questions such as the following: 
What is the relationship between home automation and 
religious practice?  What is the relationship between home automation and family life?  Accordingly, in this paper, we 
make the following novel contributions: 
• We present a case study in the use of home automation 
technology by members of a religious community.  In 
addition to describing specific practices, we discuss how 
a technology that performed mundane activities was seen 
to support spiritual experience and how participants 
oriented to the use of automation as a religious custom. 
• We discuss the relationship of home automation to family 
life, arguing that in our participants’ homes it played the 
role of an organizing system that revealed and reinforced 
the social order of the home [30]. 
• We draw on our in-depth examination of the Jewish 
perspective to inform and inspire design for the broader population, as the views of the families we studied 
provided a valuable counterpoint and prompted us to 
question common assumptions about smart home families and technologies. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  In the 
next section, we review related work.  We then discuss our 
participants and method, findings, design implications, and 
conclusions. 
RELATED WORK 
There is an extensive literature on the domestic environment (see e.g. [24] fo r a survey), and [6] is an 
excellent example of how ethnographic findings in this 
environment may be applied to design.  In addition, there is an abundant literature on smart home research; [2,17] 
provide an excellent introduction to this topic.  However, a 
major limitation of research in this area is that the user 
experience has primarily been  investigated in built 
laboratories [11,17], the notable exception being Mozer’s 
intriguing experience as the sole occupant of the Adaptive 
House [25].  In this paper, we report a study of real-life, 
long-term user experiences w ith home automation systems 
that emerged in response to the needs of the residents. 
Literature on spirituality and technology is significantly 
more sparse than that on smart homes, but compelling arguments have been made regarding its importance, and 
[1,26] call for more research in  this area.  The recent work 
of Wyche et al.  on the use of communication technologies 
by pastors in megachurches is  an excellent exploration in 
this vein [31], and we hope to further contribute to the 
literature on spirituality and technology by exploring the needs and experiences of the Orthodox Jewish population. 
There is a rich and extensive literature on Jewish 
community and Jewish practice, including Sabbath rituals e.g. [8,9,15].  This research  focuses primarily on issues 
such as the meaning, history,  regulations, and experience of 
Jewish life.  Many practical guides exist regarding Sabbath behavior, e.g. [5], and multiple professional and religious 
organizations provide guidance on and develop specialized 
Sabbath Day technologies for the Jewish population, e.g. 
[32].  Some mainstream commercial vendors also supply appliances such as ovens with Sabbath modes.  The 
imagination of the press has occasionally been captured by 
these technologies [12,13].  Th ese reports have focused on 
technology and rules for its use, rather than on user 
experience.  To our knowledge this paper reports the first 
study of user experience with Sabbath technology – the first study to examine issues such as day-to-day practices with 
Sabbath technology, which technologies people choose to 
employ and find useful in their homes, user response to and 
perception of Sabbath technology, the interaction of 
Sabbath technology with family life, etc. 
PARTICIPANTS AND METHOD 
We recruited participants thro ugh advertisements in online 
forums, Jewish community email lists, and a Jewish newspaper, and through a developer of high-end automation 
systems for the Orthodox Jewish community.  We visited a 
total of 20 homes and interviewed a total of 29 participants 
(16 men and 13 women) as well as having informal 
interactions with some additional household residents.  Almost all participants were adults, at a variety of life 
stages (from young parent to retired empty-nester); many of 
the households had children of various ages.  Participants had a range of occupations (e.g. dental hygienist, 
homemaker, CFO) and a range of roles in the synagogue 
(congregants, trainers-of-converts-to-Judaism, and rabbis).  Thirteen of the homes were in the New York metropolitan 
area and seven were in the San Francisco metropolitan area.  
Homes were in both suburban and urban areas, and were predominantly single-family detached homes. 
Most households were Modern Orthodox although some 
were Ultra-Orthodox.  A sm all number were Conservative 
households that adhered to fairly strict practices.  In 
general, participants were fairly highly integrated in 
mainstream American culture  and product consumption, 
consistent with Diamond’s discussion of Modern 
Orthodoxy as “a style of Jewish  life that blends the rituals 
of Orthodoxy with the rituals of the mall, the gym, and the Long Island Rail Road” [Gross, quoted in 8].  All 
participants used some type of automation to adhere to the 
Sabbath code of conduct outlined in Jewish law, ranging 
from quite basic to very sophisticated.  Quite a few of the 
participants, including some who had become Orthodox later in life, had decades of experience using automation on 
the Sabbath (sometimes dating back to childhood), either in 
the same home or in multiple homes. 
In addition to the participants we visited in their homes, we 
interviewed the developer of a high-end automation system, 
and had additional conversations with many other members of the community by telephone, over email, and in person.  
We also visited Judaica stores and Jewish neighborhoods 
and had an overnight Sabbath visit with one of the families. 
CHI 2007 Proceedings · Home Spirituality April 28-May 3, 2007 · San Jose, CA, USA
 528We conducted home visits in December 2005 and May 
2006.  Visits typically lasted one-and-a-half to two hours, 
and consisted of a semi-structured interview, a tour of 
relevant parts of the home including demonstrations of technology in place, and a photo-elicitation exercise 
designed to prompt discussion [18].  All interviews were 
video-taped or audio-taped.  All interviews were transcribed verbatim, resulting in a corpus of approximately 1300 pages 
(approximately 340,000 words).  We performed an affinity 
clustering of the data to identify emergent themes [4].  Note that our analysis has the attendant advantages and 
disadvantages of an “outsider’s” perspective, as none of the 
members of our research team is an Orthodox Jew. 
THE SABBATH EXPERIENCE 
In this section, we discuss the temporal structure of the week, prescribed and proscribed activities, orientation to 
technology and information, and respite and renewal.
4 
The Structure of the Week 
The Jewish belief is that the ultimate aim on Earth is to 
transform Earth into God’s dwe lling – this is the work six 
days of the week [5].  Particip ants characterized this time as 
busy or hectic, a time of changing things and manipulating 
the world.  During the week, in addition to conducting everyday activities, one prepares for the Sabbath, 
particularly on Friday afternoon as the Sabbath approaches.  
Preparing for the Sabbath includes preparing food, 
preparing the physical self (bathing, cutting nails, cutting 
hair), and preparing the domestic environment (getting 
fresh cut flowers, setting the lights and automation). 
A few minutes before sunset on Friday, the Sabbath begins 
and continues until after sunset on Saturday.  On the 
Sabbath, the aim is to experience a taste of Paradise, the 
world to come.  Although it is often colloquially referred to 
as a day on which to “rest,” literally it is a day on which to “cease” creating, a serene peri od during which one strives 
to have minimal impact on the world and to leave the world 
unchanged.  During the Sabbath, the Orthodox Jew submits to external processes and “renounces his autonomy and 
affirms God’s dominion over him” [Tsevat, quoted in 9].  
By surrendering control, Orthodox  Jews strive to clear their 
minds to focus and reflect on la rger issues.  The Sabbath is 
described as a time of peace, relaxation, and reflection. 
Isaac: “There’s clearly preparation that go on ahead of time.  
But pretty much when the Sabbath begins, life comes to a 
screeching halt…  from a tornado to complete calm.  And uh 
you spend the next 25 hours within that envelope of calm, sort 
of disconnected from the real world, if you would.” 
                                                           
4 Our findings resonate with reports of Jewish practice in other 
literatures, e.g. [9,15].  However, note that there may be alternative 
viewpoints to those expressed by our participants.  While our findings 
regarding the Sabbath experience provide valuable context, and we make a contribution by interpreting them from the HCI perspective, our primary novelty lies in our findings regarding Sabbath Day home automation reported in the subsequent sections.
 Lisa: “On the Sabbath, among the th ings that we are conscious 
of not doing is changing things.” 
Rachel: “It’s like time standing still.” 
Prescribed and Proscribed Activities 
A number of activities are explicitly encouraged on the 
Sabbath – going to synagogue, spending time with family 
and friends, studying religious materials, reflecting, taking 
naps, and going for walks.  The activities are such that the Sabbath is a “beautiful” day, w ith many pleasant social and 
sensory experiences such as nice scents and delicious food. 
Activities associated with work or creation are explicitly 
prohibited on the Sabbath.  Specifically, the halacha  (the 
collective corpus of Jewish religious law) forbids 39 activities that were associated with maintaining the temple 
in ancient times, such as sowing, baking, or kindling a fire.  
While the halacha itself is from ancient times, it has been continuously interpreted and reinterpreted by rabbinical 
authorities as society and technology have evolved.  In 
these interpretations, a wide range of activities related to secular life are forbidden, from carrying a key to synagogue 
to reading a newspaper.  For our purposes, one of the most 
significant modern interpretations is that it is forbidden to turn electrical devices on or  off.  (There are several 
different arguments as to why this might be prohibited, e.g. 
that turning electrical devices on  and off is associated with 
kindling or extinguishing a fire , but in any case there seems 
to be consensus that it is in fact prohibited.)  The objective 
of these prohibitions is not punishment or sacrifice per se ; 
rather their aim is to create an appropriate environment and 
mindset in which to receive the Sabbath. 
Isaac: “On a day when all standard activity stops and work 
stops, et cetera, you end up with a much clearer lens into any 
relationship you have with God.” 
Luke: “We imitate what God did…  for six days we exert 
mastery over the physical world.  We do things.  We create.  
We write.  We plant and sow and reap and cook…  just as God 
himself set the whole thing up by creating the world.  Then on 
the seventh day, just as he rested… similarly the underlying 
principle of Shabbat…  is to refrain from creative activity… 
and in particular to refrain from demonstrations of mastery 
over God’s world.  This is a day of – to focus on the spiritual 
rather than the physical.  And so we refrain.  Ideally when we 
leave Shabbat 25 hours after we enter it, we wi ll have made – 
we will have had as light a footprint as possible on the earth…  
I think you can see how turning a light switch on and off, 
though it involves no work, is nonetheless very much a 
demonstration of mastery.” 
Technology and Information 
Technology and information were often directly associated 
with stress or worry, and respite from them was an 
important part of the Sabbath experience.  (Note that these issues arose spontaneously and not in response to a question 
about technology; many of the other issues we report arose 
spontaneously as well.) 
CHI 2007 Proceedings · Home Spirituality April 28-May 3, 2007 · San Jose, CA, USA
 529Leah: “Do I want to know about the news?  Do I want to 
receive telephone calls – be able  to hear them?  I personally 
shut them out.  A lot of people leave on their answering 
machine and so they can hear it.  I personally find that 
invasive on the Sabbath…  Do I want to know the news?  
Probably not.  It could only be bad and there’s a sense that you 
don’t want something invasive coming into your Sabbath 
celebration.  The bad news will wait, and it does.” 
Stuart: “Not driving a car; not answering the phone; not 
turning –” 
Lisa: “– not cooking –” 
Stuart: “– on the computer.  These are liberating things and 
this is part of the Sabbath.” 
Leah: “It’s muktzah …  something that you don’t touch on the 
Sabbath because it’s something th at’s essentially forbidden…  
If a kid comes up and starts foo ling with the laptop you say to 
him, ‘It’s muktzah .’  It’s not something that is within the realm 
of the Sabbath.” 
Further, technology was often positioned as being at odds 
with a focus on family and friends (in fact, one family joked 
that they think of themselves  as “Post Modern Orthodox”), 
and time away from technology  was seen as nurturing 
relationships. 
Lisa: “It’s a sense of being together and caring for each other 
and loving in low tech.” 
Luke: “A lot of the times during the week Talia will say, I was 
really looking forward to having you at home.  And so I get 
home and she says, great, now we can knock [off] some of the 
TV we’ve accumulated.  On Shabbos when I’m home we 
really talk…  the point is it’s so mething that forces us to deal 
with ourselves as humans and as the primary focus rather than 
we’ll watch this TV together and that’s sharing.” 
Respite and Renewal 
Overall, the Sabbath is a time of renewal, consistent with a 
basic human desire to be refreshed psychologically.  It 
encompasses activities such as reflection that are restorative [20], and provides respite from weekday activities, stressful 
thoughts, technology, and information. 
Talia: “There’s just somethin g about it that I feel more 
peaceful on Shabbat and it’s like a recharging of my batteries 
every week.” 
Lisa: “We use a lot more technology during the week because 
it’s interactive and we’re changing things…  the Sabbath is in 
some ways like taking a vacation from the week.” 
Hilary: “[The Sabbath is] a time-out from the ‘hectic-ness’ of 
every day life, to stop and refocus, and relax and regain your 
inner balance.” 
HOME AUTOMATION SYSTEMS FOR THE SABBATH 
As mentioned above, manually controlling electrical 
devices is generally prohibited on the Sabbath.  However, 
many Orthodox Jews use timers or other automation 
technologies on the Sabbath.  The reasoning is that, although an Orthodox Jew should not do anything during  
the Sabbath that has impact on electrical devices, they can 
perform acts in advance  of the Sabbath that will have impact during the Sabbath.  By this reasoning, many rabbis 
teach that timers are accepta ble on the Sabbath but motion 
sensors are not because if one triggered a motion sensor, 
one would be affecting the state of the world directly with one’s body (accordingly, devices such as motion sensors 
must be automatically or manually disabled on the 
Sabbath).  We discuss these issues further below. 
Types of Automation 
In this section, we discuss the types of automation used in the homes we visited.  There was a wide range of 
capabilities, from scheduling events at fixed times to using 
environmental sensors such as a rain sensor to trigger the closing of a skylight.  The homes we visited fell into three 
categories, based on the tech nology in use: Timers (9 
homes), X10 (6 homes), and RightSchedule (5 homes).  We do not have data on overall trends and do not suggest that 
this distribution is representative of the overall population. 
Timers .  In the Timer homes, automation generally 
consisted of a handful of rotary timers or digital timers 
(approximately two to six would be typical), most often for 
places or devices with relatively predictable use patterns, 
such as the dining room chandelier.  Commercial 
appliances were also often useful on the Sabbath, e.g. TiVo to record programs to watch at a later time or ovens with a 
Sabbath Day mode to disable automatic shut-off. 
A number of “low-tech” solutions typically complemented 
the use of automation in these homes.  Lights in areas of the 
home with less predictable use, such as bathrooms, were 
often simply turned on before the Sabbath and left on for the duration.  Kitchens also had a number of additional 
appliances such as “blechs” (specialized hot plates that 
adhere to halachic constraints regarding food preparation). 
Abigail: “Then there’s the kitchen, which is a timer fest in and 
of itself.” 
Lisa: “The refrigerator light has been turned off since the day 
it arrived…  we just took the bulb out so that we don’t have it 
turning on and off on the Sabbath [when we open the 
refrigerator door] and don’t have to worry about it...  But that’s 
not exactly automated.  That’s- that’s anti-automated.” 
X10.  Several of the homes used X10, a system for using 
household wiring to send digital data between devices.  X10 
users would set up a schedule on a computer, which would 
then send commands to various X10 controllers throughout the home to turn devices on and off.  X10 users tended to 
develop fairly complex lighting schedules that covered 
more areas in the home than timers, and X10 was used to control a wide range of devices from lights to towel 
warmers to skylights.  X10 is notoriously unreliable and 
tricky, so the people using this system tended to be fairly tech-savvy “do-it-yourself’ers” who had impressive stories 
of both successes and failures.  In addition to using X10, 
these homes usually employed a few “low-tech” solutions, such as “blechs.” 
CHI 2007 Proceedings · Home Spirituality April 28-May 3, 2007 · San Jose, CA, USA
 530RightSchedule .  Several of the homes we visited used a 
high-end system developed specifically for the Orthodox 
Jewish community.  The system includes a rule-based 
program that uses the Jewish calendar and the families’ specified preferences to dynamically generate a schedule 
that interfaces with controllers (typically X10) installed by 
the system developer, as well as with other automation systems in the home, such as lighting, sprinkler, security, 
entertainment, and security systems.  RightSchedule knows 
the Jewish calendar for the next several decades, and takes into account the varying requirements for different 
holidays.
5  For example, the dairy oven may be turned on 
by the automation system only once a year, for the Shavuot 
holiday. 
RightSchedule is an expensive system, costing tens of 
thousands of dollars or more.  The system is targeted at the 
control of numerous devices in large, luxury homes.  For 
example, one such home that we visited had eleven bedrooms and nine bathrooms.  On a three-day holiday, 
approximately 5500 on/off signals are sent to the 175 
devices in this home, including not only myriad lights and kitchen appliances, but also more exotic items such as an 
elevator, a large bank of drapes, and a roof that slides back 
to create the religiously required open air “booth” during the annual Sukkot holiday.  In many homes, RightSchedule 
also blinks the lights to provide reminders, for example that 
services at the nearby synagogue are about to begin. 
All the clients we met had established a highly personal 
relationship with the developer, Mr. Herschel.  He is a 
home automation coach of sorts, a key influence in how his clients think about automation and the strategies they use.  
He meets with clients for extensive planning sessions 
before their systems are installed and becomes intimately 
familiar with their lives.  His relationships with them are 
similar to those that a physician might establish (as opposed to those that an electrician or  a plumber might establish).  
He is treated as a professional and a peer by his high-end 
clientele, frequently staying in their homes when traveling.  
Participants reported that Mr. Herschel is very personally 
committed to the system, and by all accounts he and his 
staff provide exceptional service.  Mr. Herschel provides a buffer between his clients and the implementation.  
Debugging is virtually always done by Mr. Herschel and his 
staff rather than by household occupants, and in fact some clients seemed largely unaw are of how the technology 
worked or even that X10 wa s present in their homes.  
Clients routinely orient to Mr . Herschel as the interface to 
                                                          
 
5 In addition to observing the Sabbath, the Jewish community also has 
a complex holiday schedule.  Holida ys have many similarities with the 
Sabbath, as well as special requireme nts of their own.  Automation is 
therefore useful on holidays as well as on the Sabbath, and when 
holidays fall adjacent to the Sabbath , the Jewish community needs to 
plan a schedule (including automation) for two or even three consecutive days.  Our observations regarding use of automation on the Sabbath are usually germane to use of automation on Jewish holidays as well.
 the system, often phoning or emailing him to request 
changes to the system rather  than using the computer 
interface to make changes themselves – even the simplest 
changes, such as making a light st ay on half an hour later or 
changing the house from “va cation” mode to “here” mode 
(which can be done just by pressing a button on the wall), 
were likely to be made through Mr. Herschel or his staff. 
Motivation and Use on Non-Religious Days 
In almost all households, participants expressed that their primary motivation for getting and continuing to use 
automation was religious observance, and occupants were 
generally quite satisfied with their systems.  Most expressed that it would not be worth installing and maintaining 
automation if it were not for the Sabbath.  However, once it 
was in place, there was some use of it on other days. 
Trisha: “Once we had the system in then we do other things… 
once it’s here and we spent th e money on the switches, then 
we have them go on, you know, go off at night...” 
Noam: “Well, it all started from the Sabbath part.  From there 
it…  went to the entire week.” 
One might imagine that automation might be co-opted for 
significant non-Sabbath use th at might even eventually 
overshadow Sabbath use, but this did not generally seem to 
have occurred.  Almost all participants reported the systems would not be worth getting if not for religious purposes, 
and utility on non-religious days tended to be limited.  
While practices varied, the most useful non-religious functions appeared to be: (1) turning lights on and off 
automatically when no one was home, to make the house 
look “lived in” for security; and (2) turning off lights that were out of sight and/or out of reach, either automatically 
or with a remote at the side of the parents’ bed. 
AUTOMATION AND THE GOALS OF THE SABBATH 
Interestingly, while information and communication 
technologies and interactive t echnologies were perceived as 
being at odds with the Sabbath, automation technology was 
perceived as promoting the goals of the Sabbath.  In this 
section, we discuss three primary ways in which automation was seen to contribute to the goals of the Sabbath. 
Relief from Burden 
Recall that on the Sabbath one strives to clear one’s mind 
and remain in a reflective state.  Ceding mundane 
responsibilities to the automation system “freed up” the minds of participants so they could focus on issues that 
transcended daily life.  Ironically, technology was used to 
free the residents from technology; more technology provided the illusion of less technology. 
Rachel: “It really is liberating to just know the kind of like the 
support mechanisms are taken care of and you can just go 
ahead and live and function and meet your goals. And the 
system’s kind of there to support you. It’s a nice feeling.” 
Rachel: “We try, as a couple, to  work on having those things 
in place so that we can really enjoy our Sabbath, our Shabbat, 
CHI 2007 Proceedings · Home Spirituality April 28-May 3, 2007 · San Jose, CA, USA
 531with our family and friends and not have to worry about – 
when you have all the details in place, you can get down to 
business and look at the bigger picture.” 
Hilary: “Having our home automated means that we’re not 
doing the things that we normally do on the other six days of 
the week. These things are taken care of for us; I’m not 
cooking; I’m not washing…” 
Robert: “Once it’s done… we ignore it… we’ve set up and 
we’re done …we don’t give it any thought.” 
Nathan: “I can avoid all the el ectronics; thinking about them, 
or why they’re on or why they’re off.” 
Joseph: “It’s a simplified life.  We don’t have to deal with the 
lights.  We don’t have to deal wi th, but it just happens.  And it 
just happens without us, and we  benefit from it.  And that’s 
really the power of it uh from our perspective.” 
Enhancement of the Experience 
There was a sense that the automation concealed what was 
going on behind the scenes, giving a pleasing final effect. 
Joseph: “The notion of going on with your life with the 
simplicity of the Sabbath while all this complex stuff is 
happening elsewhere.” 
Ephraim: “You don’t see [the wiring and stuff like that] but 
then you see a beautiful end product.” 
The mechanical functions the automation system performed 
were not considered central to the Sabbath experience and, while valuable, automation was rarely characterized as 
necessary.  Participants explained that most Sabbath 
activities would occur with or without automation – simply leaving lights on and appliances running is a viable 
alternative (albeit one that is “wasteful” of energy).  The 
impact of automation on the Sabbath is therefore fairly 
subtle.  For example, when non-essential devices were 
automated, people were more likely to use them on the 
Sabbath – a family with automation might have wall sconces turn on for part of the Sabbath, while without 
automation they might rely on only the main overhead light 
in the room.  Technology wa s typically characterized as 
“enhancing” the Sabbath e xperience, adding to the 
atmosphere and the ambiance (e.g. prettier lights, running 
water in a fountain, better food, etc.).  The Sabbath is a sensory experience, and the automation complements this. 
Lisa: “It just makes it more…  physically comfortable… but, 
most of what happens, would happen anyway.” 
Surrender of Control 
The Sabbath is associated w ith submission to external 
processes and entities.  Our participants’ narratives 
regarding control were complex.  While there were some situations in which automation was associated with a sense 
of being in control, a more prominent and fascinating theme 
that emerged was the benefit of intentional surrender of control on the Sabbath.  There is value in the inability  to 
control – if a process can not be  overridden or controlled in 
the moment, there is less motivation to actively attend to it, and passivity can facilitate reflection.  As used, the automation systems in place are therefore very consistent 
with and reinforce the Sabbath experience.  Accordingly, 
participants simply experienced the effects of the 
automation system as they occu rred.  In fact, as in other 
areas of their lives, toleran ce for undesirable outcomes 
appeared to be part of the value system.  The systems had 
generally evolved to the point where they were fairly reliable, but errors did occur.  When the automation system 
did something inconvenient, the ideal attitude appeared to 
be calm acceptance rather than frustration. 
Nathan: “God controls everything – that’s the way we live it…  
I do it [set up the lighting] and if it works it works, and if it doesn’t that’s what God wants it.” 
Reuben: “I don’t get upset if it doesn’t happen.  But it’s nice 
when it does.  The fact that everything works and is in sync, 
and you know, and everything runs smoothly.  We like when 
our lives are running smoothly.” 
In fact, setting up and then relinquishing control to the 
automation system was even seen as valuable training in the 
principles of the Sabbath. 
Leah: “You’re used to doing things at will…  And for the 
Sabbath, particularly, you preprogram and you’re done...  as 
soon as the Sabbath comes in, I’m out of control.  And that – 
in some ways that’s a very interesting lesson in life, and it’s 
one of the lessons of the Sabbath... That could be very 
frustrating, and it’s also a good lesson in life.  You have to live 
with what you’ve got.  So, that’s the part of your automation 
that it’s a fixed schedule and you need to live with it.” 
Leah: “You have to get used to restraining yourself from 
operating or being comfortable with  not operating.  I mean this 
is a very difficult thing and it takes a while to get used to, if 
you haven’t been brought up that way.  Which I was not.” 
USE OF AUTOMATION AS RELIGIOUS CUSTOM 
Use of home automation appeared to have become a 
religious custom for the participants, both a ritual in the 
home and a sign of affiliation with the community.  Over 
the years, automation and/or  the atmosphere it created 
became associated with relig ious commitment and ritual. 
Stuart: “I would certainly want… to keep the same pattern.…  
It’s a shared [commitment between me and my wife] – how 
we run our home and our commitment to the Sabbath.” 
Reuben: “Also I kind of like the fact, it feels like it lends to the 
Sabbath feeling on some level.  When the lights go off, it does 
add…  it’s not a major part of the feeling…  a lot of it’s 
intangible things… but it does a dd to the atmosphere…  It’s 
probably more of a nurture thing, not nature so to speak.  
Because I grew up with it.  It’s just what you’re used to during 
the Sabbath, the lights kind of go off on a timer.” 
Stuart, who had lived in his home with a timer system for 
over thirty years, spoke of the significance of maintaining the familiar experience of the automation system, and 
explained that he would be reluctant to make any changes, 
even to get increased functionality. 
Stuart: “I could imagine some of the things that might be 
available, that we just wouldn’ t be interested in, necessarily, 
CHI 2007 Proceedings · Home Spirituality April 28-May 3, 2007 · San Jose, CA, USA
 532because we want to retain the sanctity of the day and in kind of 
in the way that we’ve known it for all these years.” 
The skeptically inclined may wonder whether the use of 
automation on the Sabbath is a “circumvention,” a 
“subterfuge,” or even a “ch eat.”  This is a complex 
question.  Religion is the fundamental organizing principle in many of our participants’ lives.  Participants evidenced a 
strong commitment to the Sabbath, and the use of 
automation notwithstanding, the Sabbath as a lived experience was dramatically different from the quotidian 
routine of the rest of the w eek.  The appropriateness of 
automation is a subject of debate in rabbinical 
interpretation, and multiple institutes specialize in halacha 
and technology, e.g. [32].  Many members of the Orthodox Jewish population enjoy debating and bonding over topics 
ranging from technology to kosher “fake bacon” [8,9]. 
Luke: “We often have a great deal  of fun on Shabbat when we 
aren’t sure about doing something or when we have a 
difference of opinion, pulling down our references off the 
book shelves and going through the legal codes and debating 
it.  That’s just a fun activity, you know, in its own right.” 
While opinions vary, especially regarding particulars, a key 
point is that automation is an external process.  The use of 
automation is therefore consistent with other notions of the 
Sabbath; just as one prepares food before the Sabbath for 
consumption on the Sabbath, one can prepare an orchestrated lighting experience in advance of the Sabbath. 
Luke: “My own analogy…  is that when God rested on 
Shabbat, the sun did not freeze in place and wait for 25 hours.  
And the flowers did not, you know – the sun rose and the 
flowers in response opened, and they all functioned as they 
were predetermined to function and continue on Shabbat.  And 
similarly I feel that the use of timers is exactly the same thing.  
Prior to Shabbat I set the rule s, and the rules now flow in 
motion throughout Shabbat.” 
Nathan: “[The water urn] turns itself on and off; when it gets 
too cold, it turns itself on; you can see it there.  It boils on its 
own accord.  It doesn’t have to keep the Sabbath, we do.” 
While a debate of the halachic correctness of automation is 
beyond the scope of this paper, in any case complicated 
strategies for dealing with forbidden activities have long been part of Jewish custom and Jewish identity and 
certainly predate the existen ce of modern-day technology 
[9].  For example, the Jewish community has a very old practice of having human servants perform forbidden 
activities during the Sabbath, and Dundes argues that 
automation is a modern-day extension of this practice [9].  Consistent with Dundes’ suggestion that “circumventions” 
can legitimately be considered customs and are an adhesive 
basis for Jewish identity, use of automation appeared to be a unifying force that par ticipants associated with 
commitment to the Sabbath and Judaism. 
Luke: “I think Shabbat more than the rest of the time I really 
feel distinct as a Jew from my surrounding western culture 
because nobody else does this stuff with the lights, you know.” Rachel: “We’re so blessed to live in a modern age where we 
can have your cake and eat it, too. You can have a light on, a 
lamp on, or turn a Shabbat light on and be able to see what 
you’re doing. And still show respect to religion and tradition 
and be able to have a living Judaism that we can pass on to our 
children. They can see how we observe it…  it’s like mixing 
technology and religion. It’s just cool.” 
HOME AUTOMATION AND FAMILY LIFE 
The automation system became interwoven with the family 
lives of our participants in a number of ways.  Naturally, 
family life is strongly connected to the religious practices 
we have discussed in previous sections, and automation is 
one mechanism that integrates family life and religious life. 
Polly: “All the little bits and pieces [of religious practice and 
religious technology] that we put  together and that we decided 
over the years would be part of our family life.” 
Leah: “People made the transition to greater and greater 
observance, and accommodated their homes and their social 
relationships accordingly.” 
More broadly, the home auto mation system reflected and 
shaped the routines, expected behaviors, and social 
relations of family life – the social order of the home.  In 
this way, it was similar to the organizing systems discussed by Taylor and Swan [30].  Taylor and Swan report on paper 
artifacts such as calendars and todo lists, and we extend 
their analysis by observing that  a technological artifact (the 
home automation system) can be  appropriated by household 
occupants to reflect and reinfo rce the social order of the 
home.  Home automation systems are particularly rich organizing systems because they  can act “autonomously” to 
modify the physical environm ent, and because they are 
embodied in the objects and infrastructure of the home.  In the remainder of this section, we focus on two illustrative 
examples of the interaction of automation with social order: 
automation as a resource for influencing behavior, and 
participants’ interpretation of the role of automation. 
Automation as a Resource for Influencing Behavior 
Automation provides cues as to what actions are expected of household occupants at what times, and it is therefore a 
resource for influencing behavior – for example, when kids are in the recreation room late at night, a light turning off 
sends a “message” that it is time to go to bed.  Further, 
actions taken by the automation system are a useful 
resource for facework, e.g. lights that turn off are a resource 
for suggesting that it is time for guests to leave after a Sabbath meal (they are not however a mandate; guests do 
sometimes stay long after the dining room light goes out). 
Daniel: “Let’s say at about 10: 00 o’clock the lights would start 
to dim, 10:15, a little bit more.  By 11:00 o’clock they would 
get the message…  You can’t tell  guests, you know, I think it’s 
time to go.  But like this –” 
Joseph: “The story was told to us…  The lights would go off at 
3:15 in the afternoon in the dining room…  if you were not 
good company, rabbi would say, ‘Oh, the lights are off.  I guess it’s time to finish the m eal and say goodbye.’  But if 
CHI 2007 Proceedings · Home Spirituality April 28-May 3, 2007 · San Jose, CA, USA
 533they were good company, the rabbi would say, ‘Wait 15 
minutes, they’re going back on.’  [laughter]  Now, this may be 
apocryphal, I don’t know.  But it’s a great example of what 
you can do with these things.” 
There are also subtle cases in which the automation 
suggests routine, even when it is not intentionally designed 
to do so.  Daniel discusses how the lights gently guide his 
behavior and create an environment that is conducive to religious observance of fasting. 
Daniel: “We have a holiday called Yom Kippur where we 
don’t eat…  When we come home from the synagogue, 
basically we go to sleep because there’s no – you can’t eat…  
So, I always find it unique.  I come into the home.  All the 
lights are on except the dining r oom light, becaus e that light 
goes out while we’re in synagogue because it reminds you it’s 
Yom Kippur.” 
It is important to clarify that while automation naturally 
interacts with schedule, there was little indication that 
participants led highly choreo graphed lives or were slaves 
to a schedule imposed by automation on the Sabbath.  
Participants employed a number of strategies (e.g. leaving 
generous time buffers in automation schedules) such that 
automation encoded and subtly influenced the routines in 
the home, rather than regimen ting them, and the technology 
was generally thought to “work with your lifestyle.” 
Interpretation of the Role of the Automation System 
Interpretations of the automation system and its actions 
were varied and complex.  However, it was quite common 
for participants to attribute meaning to actions taken by the 
automation system, and sometime s to associate them with 
expected behavior.  First, participants sometimes oriented 
to the automation system as an extension or proxy of the 
person setting the schedule of the automation system.  A 
fascinating example is that many of Mr. Herschel’s clients 
oriented to the system as an extension of him. 
Aleksei: “We usually call it the Herschel System…  Well, the 
truth is, I think of it as Mr. Herschel himself…” 
Through the automation system, Mr. Herschel becomes 
highly present in the home, and actions taken by the system 
may even be interpreted as him making comments on the behavior of the occupants. 
Aleksei: “Let’s say I would be working out late… and then all 
of a sudden all the lights go out…  But then again, he [Mr.  
Herschel] is probably right.  I shouldn’t be working out that 
late anyway.” 
Second, automation was stro ngly associated with 
caretaking, anticipation, and guidance – roles6 such as 
                                                           
6 These points arose largely in response to a prompt about 
“personality traits” of the system; we are not suggesting that 
participants think of their automation systems as people, but rather that we found it informative to consider the traits and roles they associated with the system when asked.  For example, one might have imagined that automation might be conceived of as tyrannical or 
incorrigible, but this di d seem to be the case.
 servant [16] (sometimes quite a wise servant), mother, and 
wife.  There were also occasional allusions to more godlike 
or omniscient characteristics. 
Rachel: “Nurturing like a parent or a god…  Always thinks to 
take care of the needs… Like Mother Earth taking care of 
everybody’s needs and foreseeing the needs and planning 
ahead, very mothering, nurturing.” 
IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN 
The experiences of our participants suggest a wide range of 
design possibilities.  One of the themes that we found most striking was the orientation to external forces – external 
mandates, processes, community, etc.  This perspective is in 
stark contrast with traditional visions of the smart home, which focus on control and ma stery.  For example, Hamill 
argues that “smart domestic devices should put people 
firmly in control” [16] (see [7] for a review of similar arguments), and Davidoff et al . argue that smart home 
technology should be used to give families “more control of 
their lives” [7]. 
While compelling arguments have been made that smart 
home design should focus on domesticity and cultural 
context and variation rather than technology per se  [2], to 
date it seems that smart home families are somewhat 
homogenously envisioned as control-oriented and goal-oriented, with a focus on th e achievements of the family 
and its members.  All families are not the same, and the 
families in our study provide a useful counterpoint.  They aspired to surrender control to God and external forces, 
particularly on the Sabbath.  Ra ther than seeking to exercise 
dominion, they sought to have as small a footprint on the earth as possible. They sought to explore harmonious 
connections with God, the broader Jewish community, and 
the natural world.  We believe this alternative perspective inspires new investigations in the design space, and we 
discuss three specific areas of interest below. 
Surrender of Control as a Design Resource 
As mentioned above, traditional wisdom argues for a high 
degree of end-user control.  Our findings prompt us to consider a richer se t of options in the design space.  Studies 
suggest that there are situations in which surrendering 
control offers significant psychological benefit.  Multifaceted drive theory pro poses a number of basic 
human drives such as autonomy and power.  Reiss argues 
that individuals are motivated to aim for moderation in the 
satiation of these drives; for example, “When a person 
experiences more power than he or she desires, the 
individual is motivated to be submissive for a period of time to balance experience toward the desired rate.  When a 
person experiences less power than he or she desires, the 
individual is motivated to be domineering for a time” [27]. This would suggest that some individuals might be better 
served by systems that present a wider range of options for 
autonomy, e.g. that certain individuals at certain times 
would benefit from experiences that give them a sense of 
another entity being in control.  Further, Reiss also presents 
CHI 2007 Proceedings · Home Spirituality April 28-May 3, 2007 · San Jose, CA, USA
 534findings that religiosity is associated with a desire for low 
autonomy [27].  In combination with the experiences 
reported by our participants, this would suggest that designs 
for spirituality might explore a range of experiences related to the surrender of control.   
Plainly, we are not arguing that people should not have any 
control of their devices.  We are however proposing that giving up control can be beneficial or desirable in some 
situations, and that this is an interesting design space to 
explore.  Surrender of control has been examined in, for example, game design in an urban environment [3]; here we 
propose that it is valuable to explore in domestic settings, as 
well as for spiritual purposes.  In some ways it may seem 
ludicrous to propose that something so banal as an 
automation system might be a resource for balancing basic human drives relating to autonomy and power, or for 
facilitating spiritual experiences.  One might imagine for 
example that such needs ar e more appropriately met 
through social interaction or visits to magnificent churches 
or awe-inspiring natural vistas.  Nonetheless, the 
experiences reported by our participants suggest that everyday objects can in fact be appropriated for these 
purposes. 
Support for Lifestyles and Long-term Goals 
Over time, automation became interleaved with the 
religious practices and the family lives of our participants, both reflecting and reinforcing the participants’ long-term 
goals.  Specific designs and artifacts are understood to 
guide users towards certain behaviors, e.g. [22,14], and people are known to try to create environments that are 
conducive to their goals [23] .  This suggests that, in 
addition to offering benefits that have been traditionally proposed such as convenien ce and efficiency, domestic 
technologies are resources that can be used to facilitate 
chosen lifestyles.  Davidoff et al . [7] explore how 
technology may support one such lifestyle – the lifestyle of 
the busy family [29], with its attendant value system.  A 
wide range of other lifestyles exist, with different value systems, and it is interesting to consider how technology 
physically embodied in the home might support lifestyles 
such as green living, slow living, spirituality, etc. 
Respite as a Mandate and as a Community Experience 
As the vision of “anywhere,  anytime” access to technology 
becomes increasingly real, concerns mount regarding a host 
of issues such as technology addiction, work-life 
(im)balance, social isolation, cognitive overload, etc. Understanding these issues and proposing resources to 
allow people to negotiate the boundaries between 
technology and other parts of  their lives is a central 
challenge for HCI research.  Our participants offer one 
highly informative example of how a community orients to 
and sets boundaries with technology and information, 
suggesting the following implications for the design of 
respite for the broader population: (1) externally mandated respite for strictly bounded periods of time is one viable model and (2) respite designed at the level of the 
community may be more effective than individual respite.   
Consider the story of how following religious law helped 
Talia break a technological addiction. 
Luke: “If I can tell a Talia story.  When the twin towers thing 
happened…  she turned into a complete news junky for that.  
And she literally stopped going to work and just watched, you 
know, CNN and all those networks finding out everything that 
was going on until as it happened Rosh Hashanah came, which 
was a holiday.  It came before Shabbat.  And she had to stop 
because that was the law.  And by the end of those two days of 
being turned off the media, she was still, you know, concerned and she still followed things up.” 
Talia: “But I was functional again.  I went back to work the 
next day.” 
Luke: “Right, she was no longer obsessed…” 
Talia: “I lived with the TV.  I didn’t go to work.  I didn’t even 
call to tell them I wasn’t coming in.  I just shut off from the 
world…  And that break meant, you know, so much.  So, I 
mean it really, it’s very helpful to have to turn the world off.” 
The Sabbath is an external  mandate, a mechanism that 
“forces” desirable behavior.  This external mandate is likely far more effective than having individuals set internal goals, 
and seems to be most effec tive when reinforced by the 
community (see also the argument in [23] that lifestyle change usually takes large-scale effort).  We were told that 
it is extremely difficult to observe the Sabbath when one is 
isolated from the community and when one is surrounded by other people who are not observing the Sabbath.  By 
contrast, being with members of the community makes it 
easier to be observant, because the surrounding temporal rhythms and institutional support align with one’s goals 
[28].  For example, some apartm ent buildings in Israel have 
central timing and wiring systems to control lights and 
other devices throughout the building on the Sabbath. 
It is natural to conceive of sanctuary as an individual and 
isolated experience, and designs for digital shelter have 
tended to focus on individuals or households, e.g. [10].  
However, the experiences reported by our participants suggests that objects or practi ces at the level of individuals 
or even households are not nearly  as likely to be effective at 
facilitating respite as designs targeted at communities.  Perhaps respite from technology should be reconceived as a 
community experience. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have presented a study of 20 American 
Orthodox Jewish families’ use of home automation for religious purposes.  We have explored the relationship 
between home automation and religious practice in this 
community, discussing how a technology that performed mundane activities was seen to support spiritual experience 
and how participants oriented to the use of automation as a 
religious custom.  We have also discussed the relationship of home automation to family life, arguing that in our 
participants’ homes it played the role of an organizing 
system that revealed and reinfo rced the social order of the 
CHI 2007 Proceedings · Home Spirituality April 28-May 3, 2007 · San Jose, CA, USA
 535home [30].  We have further drawn design implications for 
the broader population, including surrender of control as a 
design resource, support for long-term goals and lifestyles, 
and respite from technology.  In future research, we intend to investigate the use of domestic technologies by other 
populations influenced by clearly articulated value systems, 
such as the use of technology in the service of green living. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We gratefully acknowledge our participants for their 
kindness in welcoming us into their homes.  We thank Paul 
Aoki, Scott Mainwaring, Victor Buchli, Ryan Aipperspach, 
Tom Igoe, Sue Faulkner, and Francoise Bourdonnec for valuable discussions, comments, and support. 
REFERENCES 
1. Bell, G.  No More SMS from Jesus: Ubicomp, Religion 
and Techno-spiritual Practices.  Proc. UbiComp 2006 , 
141-158. 
2. Bell, G., and Kaye, J.J.  Designing Technology for 
Domestic Spaces: A Kitchen Manifesto.  Gastronomica  
2(2):42-62, 2002. 
3. Benford, S., et al.  Uncle Roy All Around You: 
Implicating the City in a Location-Based Performance.  
Proc. ACE 2004 . 
4. Beyer, H., and Holtzblatt, K.  Contextual Design: 
Defining Customer-Centered Systems.  Morgan 
Kaufman, San Francisco, 1998. 
5. Cohen, S.B.  The Shabbos Home: A Comprehensive 
Halachic Guide to the Laws  of Shabbos as They Apply 
Throughout the Home.   Mesorah, Brooklyn, v.1,2, 1995. 
6. Crabtree, A., and Rodden, T.   Domestic Routines and 
Design for the Home.  JCSCW  13(2):191-220, 2004. 
7. Davidoff, S. et al.   Principles of Smart Home Control.  
Proc. UbiComp 2006 , 19-34. 
8. Diamond, E.  And I Will Dwell in Their Midst: Orthodox 
Jews in Suburbia .  The University of North Carolina 
Press, Chapel Hill and London, 2000. 
9. Dundes, A.  The Shabbat Elevator and Other Sabbath 
Subterfuges: An Unorthodox Essay on Circumventing 
Custom and Jewish Character .  Rowman and Littlefield 
Publishers, Inc., Lanham, MD, 2002. 
10. Dunne, A., and Raby, F.  Design Noir: The Secret Life 
of Electronic Objects.   Basel, Boston, 2001. 
11. Edwards, W.K., and Grinter, R.E.  At Home with 
Ubiquitous Computing: Seven Challenges.  Proc. 
UbiComp 2001 , 256-272. 
12. Erard, M.  The Geek Guide to Kosher Machines.  Wired  
Magazine  12(11), 2004. 
13. Fasman, J.  Shabbat Tech.  I.D. 53(2):46-49, 2006. 
14. Fogg, B.J.  Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to 
Change What We Think and Do.  Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, Boston, 2003. 15. Frank, G., et al.  Jewish Spirituality Through Actions in 
Time: Daily Occupations of Young Orthodox Jewish 
Couples in Los Angeles.  American Journal of 
Occupational Therapy 51(3):199-206, 1997. 
16. Hamill, L.  Controlling Smart Devices in the Home.   
The Information Society  22:241-249, 2006. 
17. Harper, R. (ed).  Inside the Smart Home .  Springer, 
London, 2003.  
18. Heisley, D.H., and Levy, S. J.  Autodriving: A 
Photoelicitation Technique.  The Journal of Consumer 
Research  18(3):257-272, 1991. 
19. Intille, S.S. et al.  A Living Laboratory for the Design 
and Evaluation of Ubiquitous Computing Technologies.  
CHI 2005 Extended Abstracts , 1941-1944. 
20. Kaplan, R., and Kaplan, S.  The Experience of Nature: A 
Psychological Perspective.   Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 1989. 
21. Kidd, C. et al.  The Aware Home: A Living Laboratory 
for Ubiquitous Computing Research.  Proc. CoBuild 
1999 , 191-198. 
22. Latour, B.  Where are the Missing Masses? The 
Sociology of a Few Mundane Ar tifacts.   In W.E. Bijker 
and J. Law (eds.), Shaping Technology/Building Society: 
Studies in Sociotechnical Change  (pp. 225-258).  MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992. 
23. Mainwaring, S.D., Chang, M.F., and Anderson, K.  
Infrastructures and Their Discontents: Implications for 
Ubicomp.   Proc. UbiComp 2004 , 418-432. 
24. Mallett, S.  Understanding Home: A Critical Review of 
the Literature.  Sociological Review 52(1) :62-89, 2004. 
25. Mozer, M. C.  Lessons from an Adaptive House.  In D. 
Cook & R. Das (eds.), Smart Environments:  
Technologies, Protocols, and Applications  (pp. 273-
294).   J. Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2005. 
26. Muller, M. J. et al.   Spiritual Life and Information 
Technology.  CACM , 44(3):82-83, 2001. 
27. Reiss, S.  Multifaceted Nature  of Intrinsic Motivation:  
The Theory of 16 Basic Drives.  Review of General 
Psychology  8(3):179-193, 2004. 
28. Orlikowski, W.J., and Yates, J.  It’s About Time: 
Temporal Structuring in Organizations.  Organization 
Science  13(6):684-700, 2002. 
29. Shore, B.  Class Acts: Activity Fetishism and Busyness 
as Usual.  American Anthro pological Assoc. Mtg. 2003. 
30. Taylor, A.S., and Swan, L.  Artful Systems in the Home.  
Proc. CHI 2005 , 641-650. 
31. Wyche, S. et al.   Technology in Spiritual Formation: An 
Exploratory Study of Computer Mediated Religious 
Communications.  Proc. CSCW 2006 , 199-208. 
32. Zomet.  http://www.moreshet.co.il/zomet/index-e.html 
 
CHI 2007 Proceedings · Home Spirituality April 28-May 3, 2007 · San Jose, CA, USA
 536