Interactive Narratives for Profiling Ethics Orientation  
Carlos Pereira Santos  
NHTV Breda & Technical University 
of Eindhoven , The Netherlands  
santos.c@nhtv.nl  Vassilis -Javed Khan  
Eindhoven University of Technology  
The Netherlands  
v.j.khan@tue.nl  Panos Markopoulos  
Eindhoven University of Technology  
The Netherlands  
p.markopoulos@tue.nl  
ABSTRACT  
Two-dimensional1 arrays of bi -component structures made 
of cobalt and permalloy  elliptical dots with thickness of 25 
nm, length 1 m and width of 225 nm, have been prepared 
by a self -aligned shadow deposition technique.  Brillouin 
light scattering has been exploited to study the frequency 
dependence.  
CCS CONCEPTS  
• Human -centered computing → User models    • Applied 
computing → Computer games  
KEYWORDS  
Game Metrics; Games User Research; Ethics; Game Design; 
Games with a purpose; Genetic Algorithm.  
ACM Reference format:  
Carlos Pereira Santos, Vassilis -Javed Khan and Panos  
Markopoulos. 201 8, In Proceedings of ACM European Conference 
on Cognitive Ergonomics, Utrecht , The Netherlands , 5-7 
September, (ECCE 2018 ), 4 pages.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3232078.3232081  
1 INTRODUCTION  
Moral  judgment is the thinking process that determines if an 
idea, entity or action is right or wrong; but also various 
related concepts such as good, bad, unconventional, ethical 
or irrational, to name a few. The process an individual takes 
to determine "right " or "wrong" is directly dependent upon 
the individual’s cultural setting, context and perceived 
consequences an action might have  [16].  
Different  ethical theories propose that moral judgment is 
influenced by diverse values. Representative theories 
include: Moral Equity, Contractualism, Relativism, Egoism 
and Ut ilitarianism [16]. The conflict between these values 
under lies classic dilemmas (e.g. , Heinz's dilemma or the 
trolley problem, [13]), and is manifested in numerous 
                                                                 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full cit ation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post 
on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permiss ion and/or 
a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  entertai nment products such as movies, songs  and recently 
even games.  
Games are very rich in the extensiveness and diversity of 
player interactions, which encourages game companies to 
use telemetry to monitor player’s in -game behavior. 
Analyzing such data can provide clear and detailed 
information about what players do within the game, aimed 
mainl y at studying marketing relevance or developing 
engaging content. The last few years this practice has rapidly 
expanded and matured across the industry, and the value of 
knowing and understanding player behavior is becoming 
extensively recognized  [4]. 
Player in -game telemetry is a recurring practice in the 
industry, which allows in-depth predictive analyses such as 
expected sales figure s or expected number of players, but, 
also to support game design, authoring and content creation.  
Specifically, P layer M odeling [26] pertains to developing  
means  to measure, interpret and represent player behavior 
[17]. Recently, there has been an effort to assess personality 
profiles based on in -game behavior, like the Big Five 
Personality Traits [14,15] , HEXACO [25], Need for 
Cognition [19] and Self -esteem [18].  
These studies have shown that videogames can be seen as 
a sandbox that encourages r ole-play and that allows players 
take actions  in a way that reflects their  individual personality 
traits while at the same time avoiding their real-life 
consequences.  This research  contribute s to Player Modeling 
literature by showing how in -game choices re late to a 
player’s moral judgment.  Specifically , this study addresses 
the following research questions:  i) Is players ’ moral 
judgment related to their in -game behavior?  and ii) How can 
an interactive narrative be designed to allow the implicit 
profiling of  players ’ ethical orientation?  
The contribution of this paper is twofold. First, it pertains 
to the application of machine learning algorithms to relate 
users’ choices in interactive stories with their moral 
judgment. We show that choices players make duri ng 
 
ECCE'18, September 5 –7, 2018, Utrecht, Netherlands  
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.  
ACM ISBN 978 -1-4503 -6449 -2/18/09…$15.00  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3232078.3232081ECCE 2018 , September 5 -7, 2018, Utrecht , Netherlands  G. Gubbiotti et al.  
 
2 
 interactive narratives  can serve as an implicit measure of 
one’s ethical judgment . This can be useful as an alternative 
to psychometric questionnaires, with some advantages over 
those , such as being more fun and engaging, and potentially 
leaving less room for self -presentation bias when compared 
to explicit self -reports .   
Second, this paper contributes the case of designing such 
a game as a resource for game designers and story makers 
who aspire to capture ethical dilemmas in their narratives ; 
specifi cally we show how to assess whether the designed 
narrative  actually reflect s established criteria for moral 
judgment . 
2.2 Games and Ethics  
Earlier work looking directly into games and ethics is sparse. 
Zagal [27] reviews several video games notable for their 
moral dilemmas, and discusses et hical settings that are 
presented to players that challenge ethical norms.  
Several scholars reflect on moral disengagement in video 
games [7,10,24] . While such critique  and concerns are well 
founded, it is also important to note that a deeper 
understanding on how a player’s moral judgment relates to 
in-game choices is still miss ing, while it can precisely help  
measure the influence of games on players’ ethics.   
An attempt to profile players is reported in [5], where a 
specific game mechanic (avatar building) is used to predict 
moral dev iation. This work suggests that avatars represent 
not only their players’ psychological traits, but also correlate 
with the moral disengagement scale which assesses the 
propensity to overlook or ignore one’s own rules of moral 
conduct. Compared to that wor k, we are particularly 
interested in measuring players’ alignment with ethical 
norms rather than just their tendency to apply them in their 
in-game behavior . 
3 METHOD  
We set out to answer  two research questions: i) “Is players’ 
moral judgment related to their in -game behavior?” and, ii) 
“How can an interactive narrative be designed to allow the 
implicit profiling of players’ ethical orientation?” For this, 
we adapted a  branching narrative and examined players’ 
choice s within the story and how their choices compare with 
their responses to the MES [21]. 
We purposely used just a branching narrative, stripped 
down of any other known game mechani cs. With this setup 
we could prevent strong influences like character self -
representation or rewards that might affect the players’ drive 
towards a certain branch of the narrative and in that way bias 
the study.  
 
 
                                                                 
2 www.interst ellarmovie.net  3.1 Branching Narrative  
The branching narra tive that we developed was inspired by 
the movie Interstellar (2014)2. Our story is based on a sci -fi 
setting and places the reader in command  of a spaceship 
where he or she must manage with limited resources and a 
small crew in a last attempt to find a so lution to a plagued 
and threatened Earth.  
The story is written in English, portraying the main plot 
of the movie and featuring similar characters. The story is 
around 10.000 words (including all branches), and our data 
shows that native English speakers  take 30.5 minutes on 
average to complete a single read through  (SD=9.1). The 
story was split in multiple small segments (from 10 to 250 
words each) to be presented separately to readers and which 
provide distinct narrative sections. At the end of a section a 
way forward is presented with one or more links to following 
sections.  Singular links in a section provide a linear 
progression, while multiple links provide readers with 
choices in the narrative. A reader is asked to commit to a 
certain choice and is no t allowed to revise his or her decision.  
Across the narrative there are 15 moments that , 
independently of the previous choices,  all readers go through 
and need to make a choice. For those specific 15 moments 
there are always three randomly positioned choic es 
presented to them, each based on one of three 
aforementioned ethical norms.  
3.2 Participants  
To reach a more diverse participant group than the typical 
university participant pools [1], a crowdsourcing service 
(prolific.ac) was used and a monetary reward (£2,50) was 
provided for completing the study. Detailed participant 
demographic profiles were provided by the crowdsourcing 
service, and all participants were informed of the fact that 
anonymous data was being collected for research purposes.  
All our participants were native English speakers, and the 
average age was 35.6 (SD=11.4), with 54% being female, 
almost all were Caucasian, but the sample showed good 
diversity on religion and poli tical affiliations.  
3.3 Process  
A typical participant followed the following steps:  
• Receive an invite to play an online game  
• Open a URL to start the branching narrative  
• Complete  a demographic questionnaire  
• Complete  the MES questionnaire  
• Read the branching  narrative, and chose an o ption 
for each of the branches  
• Receive the results of the MES questionnaire and 
their choices in the branching narrativeMagnetic Normal Modes of Bi -Component Permalloy Structures   ECCE 2018 , September 5 -7, 2018, Utrecht , Netherlands  
 
 3 To avoid learning effects and self -presentation bias, we 
only considered participants’ first attempt. Furthe rmore, we 
excluded participants that had  previously  seen the movie that 
our story was based on; a specific question was included in 
our demographic questionnaire for that purpose. Our last 
exclusion parameter related to how long people took to read 
the sto ry, all outliers were also excluded, i.e., players that 
read the story under 12 minutes and above 49 minutes.  
4 RESULTS  
Looking to the direct links between the player branching 
choices and their MES results did not show any correlations. 
This led us to app ly a genetic algorithm commonly used in 
feature construction and optimization algorithms [2,8]  to 
identify  how much each branch contributes to the scores for 
each of the ethical norms. We calculated a weight: Wn,e  of 
branch n for the ethical norm e. The algorithm computed 
multiple generations of We, and convergence was achieved 
after 8 to 10 generations.  
𝐵𝑆𝑝,𝑒=∑ {𝐵𝑝,𝑛 =𝑒    𝑊𝑛,𝑒
𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒             015
𝑛=1
15 (1) 
The genetic algorithm rules are straightforwa rd: the 
weight range is between 0.0 and 2.0, and the sum of all the 
weights needs to be 15.0 (1.0 per branch). The algorithm 
uses elitist selection (best solutions are stored from multiple 
generations), and the fitness function is the Spearman’s 
statistica l correlation with the attempt to maximize the 
correlation (r) while minimizing the significance (p).  
The We (set of Wn,e for all branches) were generated by: 
i) randomly generating the full set of weights, ii) mutating a 
single weight by assigning a new random  value for a single 
branch and iii) cross -over where new sets are generated by 
cross -breeding existing sets.  
4.1 Validation with a new data set  
We recruited a new cohort  of participants  (N=20) from 
Prolific.ac. These 20 participants showed similariti es with 
our original group; their average age was 36.9 (SD=11.2) 
and 50% were female. They followed the same process and 
similarly 3 participants were excluded for similar reasons.  
Table 1: Strong positive c orrelations were found 
between the weighted branch choices and MES.  
Story vs. MES (MLearn)  N r p 
Moral Equity  17 0.511  0.036*  
Contractualism  17 0.613  0.009**  
Utilitarianism  17 0.631  0.007**  
* Significant result  
 
The difference with this group was solely on how we 
computed the  branch score , by applying the Wn,e scores that were calculated with the data collected from the first group 
of participants.  The results (see Table 1) show strong 
positive correlations between the new set of readers’ 
narrative choices and their MES scores, allowing us to 
conclude that there is a relation between players’ in -game 
choices and their moral judgment, when appropriate weights 
are applied.  
5 DISCUSSION  
A strong narrative intertwined with gameplay often helps 
create compelling ethical dilemmas. Game designers put a 
lot of effort in creating an engaging experience. By 
uncovering the correlation between in -game player choices 
with their moral jud gment we contribute to the literature  by: 
i) showing how an interactive story can correlate to self -
reported  ethical judgments and ii) illustrat ing the use of an  
machine learning approach  to profile their players’ moral 
judgments  using interactive narrativ es. Our results support 
the hypothesis that player in -game choices are influenced by 
their moral judgments. Although the study was framed in 
context of an interactive narrative, we conjecture that it 
could be applied in a similar faction in any game  that p laces 
the player s in position s, which he or she has to choose 
between ethical choices . 
5.1 Designing effective Choice/Actions identifiers  
A careful look at the narrative of high -weighted nodes shows 
that unambiguous contexts, referring  to known terms that are 
associated with norms are better able to evoke choice 
behavior that relates  to players’ ethical norms . On the other 
hand, complex introduction s, or less clear choice statements 
can dilute and appeal to multiple moral interpretations . 
Hence , the design challenge is in that the presented choices 
need to be directly associated with the ethical norm while at 
the same time they provide meaningful outcome s for the 
story.  
5.2 Designing Ethical Games  
Games, like other entertainment products, use ethical 
dilemm as and break moral codes as a way to enhance user 
experience. Due to interactivity and role play, players are 
confronted by dilemmas embedded within the games, which 
exposes players to situations like corruption, theft, or 
violence just to name a few moral ly debatable game 
experiences, but, can also serve as a canvas to explore 
loyalty, companionship and compassion  [10,23,24,27] .  
Rather than just  a medium for conveying negative 
influences, a game can have a positive contribution to the 
ethical development of individuals and companies. In this 
sense, our research also opens up the opportunity to use 
moral judgment as a game metric. By extension,  game 
developers can use player models [26] to measure players’ 
moral judgment in real time and alter the game to increase 
player engagement and enhance their  play experience.ECCE 2018 , September 5 -7, 2018, Utrecht , Netherlands  G. Gubbiotti et al.  
 
4 
 5.3 Opportunities  
Despite the study  being very promising and our conscious 
effort to recruit participants with diverse demographics 
(including gender, age and political affiliation) the 
generalizability of our results for different populations and 
cultural contexts still need to be establis hed by a replication 
study that involves a larger and more varied sample of 
participants. In addition, MES has two dimensions which 
have not been covered in the present study (Egoism and 
Relativism). For completeness future studies should address 
those two  norms as well.  
6 CONCLUSIONS  
In this work, we have examined  whether one’s choices in an 
interactive story are correlated with one’s moral orientation ; 
distinguishing between  Moral Equity, Contractualism and 
Utilitarianism. For this purpose we developed a branching 
interactive story, inspired by a science fiction movie , which 
presents players with moral dilemmas . We compared player 
choice behavior within the interactive story with player’s 
ethical orientation as measured by a questionnaire that 
gauges  one’s  ethical inclination . Based on that data we then 
applied a genetic algorithm to calculate weights to the 
different story’s branches. Our analysis of experimental data 
resulted in a weighted model of player choices which is 
correlated with their ethical inc lination and found promising 
results. We can therefore conclude that identifying one’s 
ethical inclinations through the choices they make in 
interactive stories is a promising direction as an alternative 
mechanism to questionnaires. This work adds to a gro wing 
body of research in using games to profil e individuals 
implicitly through observing their in -game behavior, and 
contributes  towards the broader recognition of games as an 
implicit measurement tool for people’s attitudes and traits.  
REFERENCES  
[1] Tara S Behrend, David J Sharek, Adam W Meade, and Eric N 
Wiebe. 2011. The viability of crowdsourcing for survey research. 
Behavior research methods 43, October 2015: 800 –813. 
[2] R. Bies, M . Muldoon, B . Pollock, S . Manuck, G . Smith, and M . 
Sale. 2006. A genetic algorithm -based, hybrid machine learning 
approach to model selection. Journal Pharmacodynamics 33, 2: 
195–221.  
[3] H Buchan. 2014. Reidenbach and Robin’s Multidimensional 
Ethics Scale: Testing a Second -Order Factor Model. Psycholog y 
Research 4, 10: 823 -4. 
[4] Magy Seif El -Nasr, Anders Drachen, and Alessandro Canossa. 
2013. Game Analytics: Maximizing the Value of Player Data.  
[5] P. Ewell, R . Guadagno, M.  Jones, and R . Dunn. 2016. Good 
Person or Bad Character? Personality Predictors of Morality and 
Ethics in Avatar Selection for Video Game Play. 
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 19, 7: 435 –
440. 
[6] Steven M Flory, Thomas J Phillips, R. Eric Reidenbach, a nd 
Donald P. Robin. 1992. A multidimensional analysis of selected 
ethical issues in accounting. The accounting review 67, 2: 284 –
302. [7] A. Gabbiadini, P. Riva, L. Andrighetto, C. Volpato, and Brad J. 
Bushman. 2014. Interactive effect of moral disengagem ent and 
violent video games on self -control, cheating, and aggression. 
Social Psychological and Personality Science 5, 4: 451 –458. 
[8] David Edward Goldberg. 1989. Genetic Algorithms in Search, 
Optimization and Machine Learning.  
[9] Seema Gupta. 2010. A Multidimensional Ethics Scale for Indian 
Managers ’ Moral Decision Making. Electronic Journal of 
Business Ethics and Organization Studies 15, 1: 5 –14. 
[10] T. Hartmann and P . Vorderer. 2010. It’s okay to shoot a 
character: Moral disengagement in violent v ideo games. Journa l 
of Communication 60: 94 . 
[11] N. Humphreys, D . Robin, R . Reidenbach, and D . Moak. 1993. 
Ethical Decision Making Process of Small Business 
Owner/Managers and Their Customers. Journal of Small 
Business Management 31, 3: 9 –22. 
[12] Insung Jung. 2009. Ethical judgments and behaviors: Applying a 
multidimensional ethics scale to measuring ICT ethics of college 
students. Computers and Education 53, 3: 940 –949. 
[13] L. Kohlberg. 1981. Essays in Moral Development. In the 
Philosophy of Mor al Development.  
[14] Giel Van Lankveld, Sonny Schreurs, and Pieter Spronck. 2009. 
Psychologically verified player modelling. In GAMEON, 12 –19. 
[15] G. Lankveld, P. Spronck, J. Herik, and A. Arntz. 2011. Games as 
personality profiling tools. 2011 IEEE Conference on 
Computational Intelligence and Games (CIG’11): 197 –202. 
[16] Roselie McDevitt, Catherine Giapponi, and Cheryl Tromley. 
2007. A model of ethical decision making: The integration of 
process and content. Journal of Business Ethics 73, 2: 219 –229. 
[17] Lennart E Nacke, Anders Drachen, Kai Kuikkaniemi, and 
Yvonne a W De Kort. 2009. Playability and Player Experience 
Research. Proceedings of the IEEE: 1 –11. 
[18] C. Santos, K . Hutchinson, V. Khan, and P . Markopoulos. 2017. 
Measuring Self -Esteem wit h Games. In ACM Intelligent User 
Interfaces.  
[19] C. Santos, V . Khan, and P . Markopoulos. 2016. Inferring A 
Player’s Need For Cognition From Hints. In Proceedings of the 
21st International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI 
’16), 76 –79. 
[20] D. Randall and A.  Gibson. 1990.Methodology in business ethics 
research: A review and critical assessment. Journal of Business 
Ethics 9, 6: 457.  
[21] R. E. Reidenbach and D. P. Robin. 1990. Toward the 
development of a multidimensional scale for improving 
evaluations of Business Ethics. Journal of Business Ethics 9, 8: 
639–653. 
[22] R. Reidenbach, Donald Robin, and Lyndon Dawson. 1991. An 
application and extension of a multidimensional ethics scale to 
selected marketing practices and marketing groups. Journ al of the 
Academy of Marketing Science 19, 2: 83 –92. 
[23] M. Schulzke. 2009. Moral decision making in fallout. Game 
Studies 9, 2.  
[24] Miguel Sicart. 2009. The banality of simulated evil: Designing 
ethical gameplay. Ethics and Information Technology 11, 3: 191 –
202. 
[25] N. Worth and A . Book. 2014. Personality and behavior in a 
MMORPG . Computers in Human Behavior 38: 322 –330. 
[26] Georgios N. Yannakakis, Pieter Spronck, Daniele Loiacono, and 
Elisabeth André. 2013. Player Modeling. Dagstuhl  Follow -Ups 6, 
59. 
[27] José P Zagal. 2009. Ethically Notable Videogames: Moral 
Dilemmas and Gameplay. Proceedings of DiGRA 2009: 9.