ACM SIGIR For um         58   Vol. 39  No. 1  June 2005  DOCTORAL ABSTRACT  
 
 
Polyphonic Music Retrieval: The N -Gram Approach  
 
 
Shyamala Doraisamy  
Department of Computing  
Imperial College London  
shyam_my@yahoo.com  
 
Supervisor : Stefan Rüger  
September 2004  
 
This Music Information Retrieval (MIR) study investigate s the use of n-grams and textual Information 
Retrieval (IR) approaches for the retrieval and access of polyphonic music data.  IR, synonymous with 
text IR, implies the task of retrieving documents or texts with information content that is relevant to a 
user's information need.  
 
With music retrieval, the use of n-grams has largely been confined to monophonic musical sequences.  
The few studies that have investigated its use with polyphonic music collections typically reduce a 
polyphonic file into a monophoni c sequence for n-gram construction.  Techniques for full -music indexing 
of polyphonic music data with n-grams are investigated.  A method to obtain n-grams from polyphonic 
music data is introduced.   The information content of ‘musical n-grams’ is extended  to include rhythmic 
information in addition to intervallic information.  For this, ratios of onset times between two adjacent 
pairs of pitch events are used. To encode ‘musical n-grams’ to obtain ‘musical words’ for indexing, a 
function that maps interval  classes to text characters is formulated, and ranges of ratio bins are defined.   
 
These encoding approaches enable encoding of the pitch and rhythm information at various levels of 
coarseness.  Various n-gramming strategies are proposed to overcome sever al problems that arise from 
the use of the n-gram method with polyphonic music.  In exploiting the time -dependent element of 
polyphonic music data, a method to index adjacent and concurrent musical words using a ‘polyphonic 
musical word indexer’ is propose d.  For the retrieval of these ‘overlaying’ musical words, i.e., when more 
than one word can assume the same within -document position, a new proximity- based operator and a 
ranking function is proposed.  
 
The evaluation results of the indexing approaches pro posed are presented, performed on a test collection 
we developed using approximately 10,000 polyphonic MIDI files. Experiments show that different n-
gramming strategies and encoding precision differ widely in their effectiveness.  The retrieval 
performance s of monophonic and polyphonic queries made to a polyphonic music collection were 
investigated using text retrieval performance measures.  For monophonic queries, we focused in particular 
on query -by-humming systems, and for polyphonic queries on query -by-example.  Error models of these 
systems were surveyed and included in the fault -tolerance study that investigated the robustness of the n-
gram method.  The feasibility in utilising position information of ‘overlaying’ musical words was 
investigated using v arious proximity -based and structured query operators available with text retrieval 
systems.  Results show that the n-gram approach to polyphonic music retrieval is a promising and robust 
approach for indexing large collections of music.