789 
 A Judgment Method of Network New s Value Orientation Based on 
Sentiment Analysis  
Zhengkang Zhang†, Ying Li 
 State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication 
Communication University of China 
 Beijing, China 
†1332151615@qq.com, liy@cuc.edu.cn 
 
ABSTRACT 
Nowadays, recommendation algorithms are playing an 
increasingly important role in online news platforms. Current 
personalized recommendation algorithms aim to find connections 
between user characteristics and news to be recommended, so as 
to achieve accurate recommendations. The goal of the personaliz ed 
recommendation algorithm is to increase the click-through rate , 
which faces the problem of excessively catering to user interes ts, 
and may even recommend content that does not conform to mainstream values in order to satisfy users' curiosity. Conside ring 
that the emotional tendency of news reflects a certain value orientation, we propose a judgment method of network news value  
orientation based on sentiment a nalysis, calculate the objectiv e 
value representation and subjective value representation of new s 
through the sentiment analysis model, and analyze these two representations by Kano model to  judge the value orientation. T he 
judgment of value orientation with the help of sentiment analys is 
model can effectively reduce the audit of online news. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• General and reference~Cross-computing tools and 
techniques~Empirical studies •Human-centered 
computing~Collaborative and social computing~Collaborative 
and social computing theory, concepts and paradigms~Social media 
KEYWORDS 
Network news, Sentiment analysis, Kano model, Value orientation  
 
 
1 Introduction 
The definition of news is "information disseminated through 
newspapers, radio, radio, television and other media channels".  In the era of mass media, pro fessional reviewers and sound 
mechanisms ensure that the values of news are correct. However,  
as information disseminators in the Internet age, some news 
published by the We Media do not in line with mainstream values . 
The content review work of major  platforms combines human and 
machine. Since the evaluation criteria of mainstream values are  
difficult to quantify, the value  orientation of content complet ely 
relies on manual review.  
For the judgment of the orientation of news values, western 
subjectivist axiologists [1] beli eve that news values derived f rom 
the people's subjective evaluation. But objectivist axiologists  
represented by the Japanese philosopher Tsunesaburō Makiguchi 
[2] believe that news values evolve from the natural attributes  of 
the object and do not depend on the subject's consciousness, attitude and evaluation of it. Zhao [3] pointed out that news, as a 
reflection of human social activ ities, is not a complete object , nor 
is it a complete subject. Therefore, when discussing the values  of 
news, the objective value factor s and subjective value factors of 
news should be discussed together  instead of separating them. 
News event tendency is the objective attribute of news value, 
and news emotional tendency is the subjective attribute of news  
value. Both of them can be obtained by sentiment analysis model . 
Therefore, we propose a value or ientation judgment method of 
network news based on sentiment analysis. After obtain the 
objective value representation and subjective value representat ion 
of news, analyze the value orientation of news by Kano model. 
2 Related work 
The value orientation of news is  often the reflection of the va lues 
of news media. The judgment of values depends on subjective 
cognition and lacks unified standards. At present, there is lit tle 
research on the judgment methods of news media values. Most of 
the research topics are to explore the value elements of news i n the 
network age. Vu [4] systematical ly discusses the judgment crite ria 
of news value in the digital age. Dick M [5] discusses the impo rtant 
elements of news value in the Internet age. García-Perdomo [6] 
empirical research shows that "human interest" is also a new element of network news value. Pompper  [7] through the 
reporter's report on the tragic death of an African American fe male 
firefighter, he emphasized the thinking of news values in the n ew 
era. Parks [8] believes that the normative concept and practice  of 
news tend to be negative, and the minds of news media and Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of thi s work for 
personal or classroom use is gra nted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyr ights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honore d. 
Abstracting with credit is perm itted. To copy otherwise, or rep ublish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior spe cific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
EITCE 2021, October 22–24, 2021, Xiamen, China 
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8432-2/21/10…$15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3501409.3501551790 
 audiences should turn to the emotional characteristics of peopl e 
and events that arouse ha ppiness, joy and courage.  
At present, the judgment of news value orientation combines 
manual method and machine audit. Through machine learning, 
deep learning and other methods, the text classification model 
trained from large-scale corpus can accurately eliminate 
pornographic, violent and other low-quality content. Then, with  
the help of manual audit, judge whether the content in line wit h the 
values one by one. 
In this section,  we review related works which are classified 
into event extraction,  sentiment analysis and Kano model. 
Event extraction: The research of event extraction mainly 
focuses on pattern matching [9] and deep learning. The method 
based on template matching needs to mine the text context correlation features under different event types, formulate the  
corresponding pattern matching template, and then realize event  
extraction through pattern matching. The formulation of event 
templates has experienced three stages: completely based on manual construction, learning templates from manual pre 
classified corpus, and then using knowledge base to automatical ly 
learn event templates. Riloff [10] identified and extracted eve nts 
by establishing a trigger word dictionary and 13 event matching  
patterns in 1993. The event matching pattern is mainly construc ted 
by using the initial description of event elements and the cont ext 
semantics of event elements, and developed an autoslog pattern 
matching event extraction system with excellent performance on MUC corpus. Kim et al. Introduced WordNet semantic dictionary 
in 1995 [11], used semantic fram ework and phrase structure for 
event extraction, and developed Palka pattern matching event 
extraction system. The pattern matching method has excellent 
performance, but the production of the template is time-consumi ng 
and laborious, and the te mplate has limitations.  
With the development of deep learning technology, event 
extraction using the feature representation ability of deep neu ral 
network has become a research hotspot. Chen [12] proposes a 
Dynamic Multi pool Convolutional Neural Network, which divides sentences into multiple segments with trigger words and  
candidate words as anchors, uses different convolution pooling 
operations respectively, and adds distance coding to extract ev ents. 
In recent years, pre-training models such as BERT [13] and RoBERTa [14] have performed well in a variety of downstream tasks after fine-tuning due to their sufficient contextual sema ntic 
word representation, which has further promoted the development  
of event extraction. Yang [15] used BERT to obtain word vectors  
in the text input stage of the event extraction model to enhanc e the 
semantic representation ability, and solved the problem of poor  
extraction effect when candidate words overlap through integer dynamic programming. 
Sentiment analysis: Traditional sentiment analysis mainly 
focuses on sentiment classification based on dictionary and 
semantic rules. It uses a set sentiment dictionary and semantic  rules 
to formulate different weight calculation methods according to 
different combinations, and finally obtains the overall sentime nt 
score which relies on manual experience too much. For the 
construction of emotional dictionary, the early Senti Word Net [16] 
emotional dictionary combines words with the same meaning according to Word Net, and gives words positive or negative 
polarity scores. Cai et al. [17]  solved the polysemy problem of  
emotional words by constructing an emotional dictionary based o n 
a specific domain. Experiments show that the effect of 
superposition of SVM and GBDT cla ssifiers is better than a sing le 
model; Rao et al. [18] used three pruning strategies to 
automatically build a vocabulary level emotion dictionary for 
social emotion detection. In addition, they also proposed a met hod 
based on topic modeling to build a topic level dictionary, in w hich 
each topic is related to social emotion, which is very helpful in 
predicting the emotional dist ribution of news articles and 
identifying the social emotion of news events. 
With the development of neural networks, sentiment 
classification models based on deep learning have achieved bett er 
results in this field. Li et al. [19] proposed a multi label ma ximum 
entropy (MME) model for short te xt emotion classification. 
Experiments show that the accuracy of this method on relevant 
data sets reaches 86.06%; Gopalakrishnan et al. [20] proposed s ix 
simplified LSTM models with different parameters to realize the  
sentiment analysis on the Republican debate twitter data set. Experiments show that different parameter settings and model 
layer settings will affect the experimental results. Teng et al . [21] 
proposed a multi-dimensional topic classification model based o n 
long-term and short-term memory. The model is composed of long-term and short-term memory (LSTM) cell network, which 
can process vectors, arrays and high-dimensional data. The experimental results show that the average accuracy of the mode l 
can reach 91%, and the highest can reach 96.5%; Through 
emotional analysis of information in social media and online 
forums, public opinions can be effectively obtained.  
In addition to the research on the method of single neural 
network, many works consider the combination and improvement 
of different methods, and apply them to emotion analysis. Fully  
considering the advantages of recurrent neural network and 
convolution structure, Madasu et al. [22] proposed a sequential  
convolution attention recursive ne twork (SCARN). Xing et al. [2 3] 
introduced a new parameterized c onvolutional neural network for  
aspect level sentiment classification. This method uses 
parameterized filter (PF-CNN) and parameterized gate mechanism 
(PG-CNN), and achieves high accuracy on EM Eval 2014 datasets dataset, which can reach 90.58%; Munikar [24] realizes fine-grained sentiment analysis tasks through BERT. Through 
experiments on Stanford sentient treebank (SST) data set, it ca n 
achieve 94.7% accuracy on SST-2 data set and 84.2% accuracy on 
SST-5 data set; 
Kano model: Kano model [25] is a two- dimensional cognitive 
model of product quality characteristic satisfaction and user satisfaction that was formally established in 1984 by Noriaki K ano, 
a well-known quality management expert in Japan, inspired by 
Herzberg's two-factor theory. As a two-dimensional qualitative 
analysis model, it can effectivel y explore the relationship bet ween 
subjective value representation and objective value representat ion 
of online news, so as to achieve the judgment of online news va lues.  
As a qualitative analysis method, the original Kano model has 
subjective defects to a certain extent. Berger et al. [26] cons tructed 
a measurement system with multiple scales to measure the791 
 satisfaction and dissatisfaction level of users, and realized the 
quantification of Kano model co mbined with questionnaire survey  
method. However, this method does not consider the user's important perception of product or service quality elements. Hs iao 
et al. [27] used latent semantic analysis and Kano model to stu dy 
the text comments of high-end hotels in order to understand the  
service attributes of customers' concerns and expectations. 
3 A judgment method of value orientation in 
network news based on sentiment analysis 
The judgment of news value orie ntation should consider two 
aspects: the objective value attribute of news and the subjecti ve 
value attribute of news. The objective value attribute of news is 
determined by the events in news reports. Usually, news events 
include positive news events and negative news events. Positive  
events are inspiring and full of positive energy, while negativ e 
events are often sad, such as disasters and attacks. The subjec tive 
value attribute of news is determined by the news media, becaus e 
the news media is the processor of news events.  News reports 
also include positive reports and negative attitude. To sum up,  we 
judge the orientation of news values from two dimensions: the event tendency of news and the  emotional tendency of news. 
For the judgment of news event tendency, our idea is to extract  
news events from news texts through event extraction, and then 
judge the tendency of news events by using the existing effecti ve 
judgment methods of news event tendency; Through the sentiment analysis model to obtain the emotional tendency of news. After 
obtaining the characteristics o f the two dimensions of event 
tendency and emotional tendency o f news text, it is mapped to t he 
quartile bitmap of value orientation analysis based on Kano mod el. 
The method of judging the value orientation of online news 
consists of the following parts: news event extraction, news va lue 
representations extraction, and  value orientation judgment. New s 
event extraction is to extract news events that do not carry 
emotional information from the news. The extraction of news 
value representations has two parallel subtasks: the extraction  of 
subjective value representations and the extraction of objectiv e 
value representations. The extraction  of subjective value 
representation takes news text with emotional information as th e 
input of the sentiment analysis model, and the other takes news  
events that do not carry emotional information as the input of the 
model. Finally, we use the Kano model to analyze these two valu e 
representations to judge the orientation of values. The overall  
framework of our value orientation judgment method is shown in Figure 1. 
Event extraction:  The purpose of event e xtraction module is 
to extract news event representation without subjective emotion  
from news. At present, the outpu t of end-to-end event extractio n 
model is often the description of news events. The description may 
contain words and phrases carrying emotional information, which  
is not what we want. Therefore, we consider using the keyword 
extraction model based on BERT to extract the keyword sequence 
describing news events from the news text and use it as the 
expression of news events. First, we segment the news text and use a custom sentiment 
dictionary to remove sentiment words to ensure that news events  
do not carry emotional information. After the candidate word sequence is generated, the embedding vectors of the candidate 
word and sentence is generated based on BERT, then we calculate   
 
Figure 1: The orientation judgment framework of network 
news values 
 
the cosine similarity to find th e candidate words or phrases th at are 
most similar to the document. 
 
Figure 2: Flow chart of event extraction 
 
And then we use Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR) to 
ensure the diversity of candidate words . Finally, we regard th e 
extracted keyword sequence as news event. 
MMR ൌ argmax
஼೔∈஼\௄൤𝜆⋅c o s ሺ𝐶௜,𝑑 𝑜 𝑐 ሻെሺ1െ𝜆 ሻmax
஼ೕ∈௄cos൫𝐶௜，𝐶௝൯൨ 
Where C is the set of candidate phrases,  K i s  t h e  s e t  o f  
extracted phrases, doc is the full document embedding, 𝐶௜ and 𝐶௝ 
are the embeddings of candidate phrases i and j, respectively. 
When 𝜆 = 0.5, the relevance and diversity parts of the equation 
have equal importance.792 
 News value representations extraction:  T h e  n e w s  v a l u e  
representation s extraction includes the extraction of subjective 
value representation and objectiv e value representation. Using the 
article-level sentiment analysis model, we can get the emotiona l 
tendency and confidence of the corresponding news text. 
Emotional tendencies include positive and negative. The higher the 
confidence, the more credible the result is. At the same time, we 
use the sentence-level sentiment analysis model to obtain the corresponding confidence of news events. Event tendency also 
includes positive and negative. Since the input granularity of the 
two subtasks of news value representations extraction is differ ent, 
the sentiment analysis model needs to support both article-leve l 
sentiment analysis and sentence-level sentiment analysis, we us e 
Baidu's open-source sentiment analysis model SKEP [9]. SKEP 
can support three typical sentiment analysis tasks through fine -
tuning: sentence-level sentiment classification, aspect-level sentiment classification, and opinion role labeling. The input of the 
article-level sentiment analysis model is the complete news text, 
and the input of the sentence-le vel sentiment analysis model is  the 
keyword sequence output by the event extraction module . 
The emotional tendency and the corresponding confidence 
interval are jointly represented as the subjective value of new s (𝑠
௩):  
𝑠௩ൌ𝛼 ଵ⋅𝑝ଵ 
The subjective value representation of news is extracted using 
article-level sentiment analysis model . The  𝛼ଵ value represents 
the subjective emotional tendency , we set 𝛼ଵ  = 1 while the 
emotional tendency is positive, and 𝛼ଵ=െ1 while negative. The 
𝑝ଵ is the confidence interval of  𝛼ଵ. 
The objective value representation of news is extracted using 
sentence-level sentiment analysis model. Similarly, the objecti ve 
value of news ( 𝑜௩): 
𝑜௩ൌ𝛼 ଶ⋅𝑝ଶ 
The  𝛼 ଶ value represents the objective event tendency, 𝛼ଶ =  1  
while the event is positive, and 𝛼ଶ=െ1 while negative. The  𝑝ଶ 
is the confidence interval of  𝛼ଶ. 
Values orientation judgment:  From the perspective of event 
tendency and emotional tendency, there are four forms of news (Table 1 ). We believe that news that in line with values has the 
following two forms: a positive attitude towards a positive event, 
a negative attitude towards negative events. While the followin g 
two forms: negative attitude toward positive events, positive 
attitude toward negative events, which are obviously not in lin e 
with  values. 
Therefore, we judge the orientation of news values by 
integrating event tendency and emotional tendency through Kano 
model. Let N denote the set of news, then the value attribute of the 
news is represented as: 
𝐸
௞ൌ𝑠 ௩⋅𝑜ఔ 
According to the Kano model, we construct a quartile graph of 
news values tendency. By mapping the value attribute 
representation 𝐸௞ to the quartile map, we can judge that the news 
in the first and third quadrants in line with values, while the  news 
in the second and fourth quadran ts do not in line with values. 
Table 1: Forms of news Emotional 
tendency Event tendency In line with values 
Positive Positive True 
Positive Negative False 
Negative Negative True 
Negative Positive False 
4 Experimental results 
We crawled about 1,000 news from Sina Weibo, of which 800 
were published by mainstream media, and the other were not in 
line with values. Because the number of news that do not in line 
with values is small, and there is no open-source data set. In order 
to ensure the same amount of the two types of data, we randomly  
undersample the news that in line with the values. Because the 
output form of the final judgment  result of news values is simi lar 
to the classification problem, we also adopt the evaluation met ric 
of the classification model: accuracy rate, recall rate and F1 value. 
The results of our method are as follows: 
  
Figure 3: Histogram of results 
5 Summary 
In this paper, we propose a value orientation judgment method o f 
network news based on sentiment analysis. After extracting even ts 
through the event extraction module based on BERT, we obtain th e 
subjective value and the objective value by sentiment analysis model SKEP. Then we judge the values orientation by mapping the  
subjective value and the objective value to a quartile graph constructed by the Kano model. And judge whether the news in 
line with the values according to the quadrant of value attribu te 
representation. From the experimental results, our method works  
well. 
There is little work related to the judgment of value orientati on, 
however, the research on the judgment of news value orientation  
is indeed of great significance.  We agree that it is not enough  to 
judge news values only from event tendency and emotional 
tendency, because this is only the content characteristics of n ews. 
The future work can consider other dimensions, such as the medi a 
characteristics of news, like credibility et al. Moreover, due to the 
lack of news data sets that do not in line with the values, the  amount793 
 of our experimental data is not l arge, the relevant research wo rk is 
difficult to carry out. In the future, we hope to expand the da ta sets. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
First of all, I would like to th ank my tutor, Ms. Li Ying, for giving 
me great guidance from the selection of research direction to t he 
completion of the final paper. Her rigorous scientific research  
attitude and professional academic spirit deeply infected and 
inspired me. I also express my sincere thanks to all the teache rs 
and students in the laboratory who have given me help. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  Harcup. T, Deirdre O’neill. "What is news? News values rev isited (again)." 
Journalism studies 18.12 (2017): 1470-1488. 
[2]  Li Ren, Yu kousheng. Makiguchi axiology and the new develo pment of Japanese 
Value Philosophy [J]. Research on axiology and ethics, 2017 (01 ): 165-177. 
[3]  Zhao Z X. Positive and negative: two sides of news value [ J]. Chongqing Social 
Sciences, 2008 (07): 69-73 
[4]  Vu H T. The online audience as gatekeeper: The influence o f reader metrics on 
news editorial selection[J]. Journalism, 2014, 15(8): 1094-1110 . 
[5]  Dick M. Interactive infographics and news values[J]. Digit al Journalism, 2014, 
2(4): 490-506. 
[6]  García-Perdomo V, Salaverría R, Kilgo D K, et al. To share  or not to share: The 
i n f l u e n c e  o f  n e w s  v a l u e s  a n d  t o p i c s  o n  p o p u l a r  s o c i a l  m e d i a  c o n tent in the 
United States, Brazil, and Argentina[J]. Journalism studies, 20 18, 19(8): 1180-
1201. 
[7]  Pompper D. On Re-considering The First as a News Value to Avoid 
Stereotyping[J]. Howard Journal of Communications, 2020, 32(1):  1-23. 
[8]  Parks P. Joy is a News Value[J]. Journalism Studies, 2021,  22(6): 820-838. 
[9]  Ittoo A, Bouma G. Extracting explicit and implicit causal relations from sparse, 
domain-specific texts[C]//International Conference on Applicati on of Natural 
Language to Information Systems. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011: 52-63. 
[10]  Riloff E. Automatically constructing a dictionary for inf ormation extraction 
tasks[C]//AAAI. 1993, 1(1): 2.1. 
[11]  Kim J T, Moldovan D I. Acquisition of linguistic patterns  for knowledge-based 
information extraction[J]. IEEE transactions on knowledge and d ata engineering, 
1995, 7(5): 713-724. 
[12]  Chen Y, Xu L, Liu K, et al. Event Extraction via Dynamic MultiPooling 
Convolutional Neural Networks[C]//Proceedings of the 53rd Annua l Meeting of 
the Association for computational Linguistics.2015:167-176. 
[13]  Devlin J, Chang M W, Lee K, et al. Bert:Pre-training of d eep bidirectional 
transformers for language understanding[J].arXiv preprint arXiv :1810.04805, 
2018. 
[14]  Liu Y, Ott M, Goyal N, et al. Roberta: A robustly optimiz ed bert pretraining 
approach[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019. 
[15]  Yang S, Feng D, Qiao L, et al. Exploring Pre-trained Lang uage Models for Event 
Extraction and Generation. In: Proceedings of the 57th Annual M eeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy.ACL, 2019:5284-
5294. 
[16]  Baccianella S, Esuli A, Sebastiani F. Sentiwordnet 3.0: a n enhanced lexical 
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining[C]//Lrec. 20 10, 10(2010): 
2200-2204. 
[17]  Cai Y, Yang K, Huang D, et al. A hybrid model for opinion  mining based on 
domain sentiment dictionary[J]. International Journal of Machin e Learning and 
Cybernetics, 2019, 10(8): 2131-2142. 
[18]  Rao Y, Lei J, Wenyin L, et al. Building emotional diction ary for sentiment 
analysis of online news[J]. World Wide Web, 2014, 17(4): 723-74 2. 
[19]  Li J, Rao Y, Jin F, et al. Multi-label maximum entropy mo del for social emotion 
classification over short text[J]. Neurocomputing, 2016, 210: 2 47-256. 
[20]  Gopalakrishnan K, Salem F M. Sentiment Analysis Using Sim plified Long 
Short-term Memory Recurrent Neural Networks[J]. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2005.03993, 2020. 
[21]  Teng F, Zheng C M, Li W. Multidimensional topic model for  oriented sentiment 
analysis based on long short-term memory[J]. Journal of Compute r Applications, 
2016, 36(8): 2252-2256. 
[22]  Madasu A, Rao V A. Sequent ial learning of convolutional f eatures for effective 
text classification[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.00080, 2019. 
[23]  Xing Y, Xiao C, Wu Y, et al. A convolutional neural netwo rk for aspect-level 
sentiment classification[J]. International Journal of Pattern R ecognition and 
Artificial Intelligence, 2019, 33(14): 1959046. 
[24]  Munikar M, Shakya S, Shrestha A. Fine-grained sentiment c lassification using 
bert[C]//2019 Artificial Intelligence for Transforming Business  and Society 
(AITB). IEEE, 2019, 1: 1-5. [25]  Matzler K, Hinterhuber H H. How to make product developme nt projects more 
successful by integrating Kano's model of customer satisfaction  into quality 
function deployment[J]. Tech novation, 1998, 18(1): 25-38. 
[26]  Berger C, Blauth R, Boger D. Kanos Methods For Understand ing Customer-
Defind Quality[J]. 1993. 
[27]  Hsiao Y H, Hsiao Y T. Online review analytics for hotel q uality at macro and 
micro levels[J]. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 2020.