Worship, Faith, and Evangelism:  
Religion as an Ideological Lens for Engineering Worlds 
 Morgan G. Ames 
 Intel Science and Technology 
Center for Social Computing 
University of California, Irvine 
ideology@morganya.org   Daniela K. Rosner 
Department of Human-Centered 
Design and Engineering 
University of Washington 
dkrosner@uw.edu  Ingrid Erickson 
School of Communication  
and Information  
Rutgers University 
ingrid.erickson@rutgers.edu 
 
ABSTRACT 
While some in the CSCW community have researched the 
values  in technology design and engineering practices, the 
underlying ideologies that reinforce and protect those values 
remain under-explored. This paper seeks to address this gap by identifying a common ideological framework that appears 
across four engineering endeavors: the OLPC Project, the 
National Day of Civic Hacking, the Fixit Clinic, and the Stanford d.school. We found that all four of these communities 
utilized elements of religious practice to affirm their 
membership and shared vision. We describe the forms of 
worship  we saw in these engineering worlds, their practices of 
evangelism , and the ways in which they addressed doubt . We 
also demonstrate the role mythologies play as ideologically charged narratives. Our discussion of these parallels 
illuminates the extent and consequences of quasi-religious practices in engineering worlds and illustrates the utility of 
using religion as a ‘lens’ for understanding ideological 
commitments in engineering culture. 
Author Keywords 
Design; doubt; engineering worlds; evangelism; faith; fixing; hackathons; ideology; ideological work; mythology; OLPC; 
practice; quasi-religious behaviors; religion; values; worship. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
K.4.0. Computers in Society: general.  
INTRODUCTION 
Engineers often narrate their activities as empirically grounded, pragmatic, and solidly secular. The worlds that these 
developers, designers, and analysts create and inhabit through their common practices identify a cutting-edge, scientific, and 
rational worldview, not one steeped in tradition and focused on 
faith. A similar emphasis on the primacy of empirical evidence imbues the computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW) 
community, as it does in many other scientific communities. Even researchers who design for spiritual experiences and 
expose progressive views of automation in religious ritual (e.g. morning prayer, Shabbat) [46,47] use empirically-driven 
methodologies to develop their claims [6,48].  
Empirical evidence suggests, however, that religious 
metaphors are more entwined with technology than may be generally acknowledged. Scholars  in science and technology 
studies and related fields have explored how technologies  
become ‘salvific’ or ‘sublime’ [33,36]. Apple Inc. has been a particularly fruitful target of this kind of analysis, given the 
religious overtones of its marketing and the zealotry of its users 
[10,25,32,34,41,42]. Campbell an d La Pastina, for instance, 
show how popular discourse adop ted religious terms to frame 
and define the reception of the Apple iPhone, such as the phrase ‘Jesus Phone’ [10:1192]. Their analysis traces various kinds of narratives linking technological artifacts with 
redemption, divinity, spirituality, and religious experience 
[10:1194].  
Here, we examine the religious language that animates not just 
technologies , but the practices  of the engineering worlds that 
produce these technologies. Though we did not enter our research sites looking for religious parallels – i.e., we did not 
raise questions about religion in our interviews or observations 
– we discovered that the engineering and design practices we encountered in our data were steeped in what we call quasi-
religious  behaviors. We define ‘quasi-religious’ as enacting 
faith-like practices without necessarily following established religious tenets. We understand ‘religion’ moreover to refer to 
a coherent system of faith outside of the auspices of ‘evidence’ 
in which certain objects and practices take on symbolic import [17,44]. We found quasi-religious parallels across all four of 
our field sites: the National Day of Civic Hacking, in which 
computer programmers volunteer an afternoon or weekend to write code for civically-minded projects; the Fixit Clinic, 
where volunteer ‘coaches’ help people repair broken devices; 
the Institute of Design at Stanford (d.school), in which students are trained in design thinking and practice; and the One Laptop 
per Child (OLPC) project, which designed a laptop meant to 
overhaul education across the Global South. 
In this paper, we describe how the practices and discourses we 
found within these engineering communities surfaced three 
quasi-religious behaviors. First, we found that individual and 
collective practices of worship were a central element of 
performing group membership. Second, we observed the 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made o r
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this wor k
owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit ispermitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistributeto lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissionsfrom Permissions@acm.org.  
CSCW '15, March 14 – 18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM 978-1-4503-2922-4/15/03…$15.00  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675282 
Hacking and Making
CSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada
69communities engage in various forms of evangelism  to convert 
people to their worldviews. Third, we noted various strategies 
to address doubt  among the faithful. 
Why does this matter? We assert that recognizing and 
interrogating the vernacular religiosity within our field sites advances how the CSCW community theoretically engages 
with engineering worlds in three ways. First, it meaningfully 
expands how we understand and examine motivations to participate in engineering communities, both for longtime 
participants and potential newcomers, even in the face of 
daunting obstacles or counterevidence. Second, it highlights 
some of the blind spots that particular ideological 
commitments can raise, which can render these communities 
less inclusive, less impartial, less evidence-driven, and more 
hostile to constructive criticism th an their ideals often suggest. 
Third, it demonstrates some of the merits of extending beyond 
an analysis of ‘values’ to attend to the ideologies (described 
below) that undergird these values, a point we return to at 
length in our discussion. Overall, we argue that understanding the ideological frameworks of sociotechnical production could 
help our field account for the extant faith-based motivations behind our own design and engineering practices, potentially avoiding the pitfalls associated with them or even 
problematizing the ideological frameworks that are less just or 
inclusive than the ideals of our profession would suggest.  
BACKGROUND AND THEORETICAL DEVELOPMENT 
Several concepts from social theory are central to our analysis. In this section, we develop what we mean by ‘religion,’ detail 
the role that mythologies play in the connection between 
religion and engineering worlds, and discuss how this is an example of an ideological framework. 
Durkheim defines religion as any unified system of beliefs and 
practices relative to objects considered ‘sacred’ [17]. In our 
analysis, we contend that both technologies and the processes that create them (e.g. ‘design thinking’) become sacred. 
‘Religion’ further refers to a system of faith that is maintained 
and strengthened outside of the auspices of ‘evidence’, in which ritualized collective practices take on symbolic import 
[17,44]. While we recognize the diversity of worldwide 
practices that may fall under th e scope of ‘religion,’ we limit 
the term herein to the scope it generally inhabits in the United 
States (also the location of all of the engineering communities 
we studied), which is dominated by Judeo-Christian religious 
frameworks.  
As also discussed in the introduction, scholars of science and 
technology have uncovered deep-seated connections between technological objects  and religion, for example pointing to the 
prevalence of religious language within branding discourse [32,34,41,42] or showing how specific technologies are rhetorically connected to divinity and redemption in use 
[10,23,25,33]. These scholars have found that technologies can 
evoke what cultural historian Vincent Mosco refers to as ‘the sublime,’ or feelings of awe, tr anscendence, and connection to 
a greater purpose – feelings that, not coincidentally, are also central to religious experience [33].  We further saw that quasi-religious practices and discourses were often enacted with mythologies [33], or foundational 
narratives that were ritualistically circulated within the community and told to outsiders to reinforce collective beliefs. Considering the role of mythologies in the connection between 
ubiquitous computing and religious experience, Dourish and 
Bell use Mosco’s formulation of mythologies as narratives that make certain futures appear at once magical and inevitable, 
straightforward and ‘divine’ [16]. They juxtapose these divine 
mythologies against the ‘messiness’ and contested nature of everyday life, concluding, like Mosco, that mythologies are 
much more than simple falsehoods; they “animate individuals 
and societies by providing paths to transcendence … [and] the 
promise of the sublime” [16:4].  
Similarly implicating religion in his analysis of techno-utopian 
mythologies, religion scholar William Stahl shows how the mythologies present in popular accounts of technology’s role 
in society both reveal and conceal its social influence [42]. 
Describing these stories as tec hnological utopias and dystopias, 
Stahl illustrates the salvation, liberation and fear that emerge 
through technological myth-making, concluding that “our 
language about technology is implicitly religious” [42:3]. On the other hand, he also identifies counter-narratives that “break 
the spell of the present,” exposing the ideological stakes that 
underpin commonly circulated mythologies and suggest concrete alternatives to existing technology practice (a theme 
that will surface in our discussion of doubt). In doing so, he 
underscores the ethical dimensions of technological myth-making.  
These collective beliefs, in turn, make up what social theorists 
refer to as an ideology : a framework of norms, whether 
conscious or unconscious, that shape thoughts and actions. Cultural theorist Stuart Hall describes an ideology or 
ideological framework (we use the two interchangeably) as a “system for coding reality” that “becomes autonomous in 
relation to the consciousness or intention of its agents” [20:71]. 
Many possible ideologies may be present in engineering communities at the same time – capitalist, libertarian, and 
individualist ideologies, for example. Hall notes that this concept has been useful in social theory as “a way of representing the order of things which endowed its limited 
perspectives with that natural or divine inevitability which 
makes them appear universal, natural and coterminous with ‘reality’ itself” [20:65]. What is important in this definition is 
the way that ideology fades into the background: an ideology 
“works” because it “represses any recognition of the contingency of the historical conditions on which all social 
relations depend. It represents them, instead, as outside of 
history: unchangeable, inevitable and natural” [20:76]. In this light, the three quasi-religious  behaviors we witnessed and 
mythologies we saw circulating helped establish, negotiate, and reinforce the ideological tenets of the communities we 
studied. Mythologies  furthermore served as a specific mode of 
reifying and naturalizing these ideological norms through 
ritualized telling and re-telling of narratives. 
Hacking and Making
CSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada
70A final term that will be useful in the analysis that follows is 
that of an engineering world , of which each of these 
communities is a part. Strauss [43] describes ‘worlds’ as sets of shared activities connected by a “network of communication,” including creating and negotiating common boundaries, 
standards, ideas of ‘worth,’ and modes of judgment. Further 
fleshing out the idea of ‘worlds,’ Becker describes art worlds 
as “the network[s] of people whose cooperative activity, 
organized via their joint knowledge of conventional means of 
doing things, produces the kind of art works that the art world is noted for” [5]. These worlds may be at times ad hoc, 
temporary, or inter-organizational, but they are ideologically 
‘legible’ to one another and recognized from both inside and 
out as belonging to a culture; to paraphrase Gertrude Stein, 
there’s a ‘there’ there.  
Under the umbrella of ‘engineering worlds’, we include 
various disciplines involved with the design and development 
of new information and communication technologies in the 
larger network of communication, including computer science/engineering, mechanical engineering, and various 
forms of design. Within these worlds, we argue that designers 
and engineers understand themselves as ethical agents who assume a responsibility to protect their group’s mission and 
cohesion, and they consequen tly propagate practices and 
mythologies that are in line with the group’s underlying 
ideological framework. We suggest that these findings are not 
unique to the groups we studied, but are instances of a quasi-
religious orientation across engineering worlds (and possibly beyond) more generally.  
DATA SOURCES AND METHODS 
Four sites of observation and analysis 
We focus here on the practices of four engineering worlds. The 
first is the National Day of Civic Hacking, in which computer 
programmers volunteer an afternoon or weekend to write code for civically-minded projects. The second is the Fixit Clinic, 
where volunteer ‘coaches’ help people repair and re-use 
broken devices. The third is the Institute of Design at Stanford (d.school), in which students are trained in design thinking and 
practice. The fourth is the One Laptop per Child (OLPC) 
project, which designed a laptop meant to overhaul education across the Global South. All four sites we examined involved 
participants who were drawn to the project because of a 
conviction that its approach will affect the world in a way that they support. These common elements of passion  and 
conviction  further highlight the religious aspects of their 
practices. While parallels to religious thought and practice are not unique to volunteer-based communities focused on social 
change, the communities we studied make such practices more 
apparent. 
We do not use these sites as ‘case studies’ in the traditional 
sense, but rather empirical and historical materials through 
which we find commonalities. In the following sections, we 
instead integrate our findings thematically.  One Laptop per Child Project 
MIT professor and Media Lab co-founder Nicholas Negroponte announced the One Laptop per Child project in 2005. He described a ‘mission’ to build a $100 laptop (a 
benchmark that proved to be infeasible), with open-source 
educational material based on the tenets of ‘constructionist’ learning [39,40], for children in developing countries. In 
practice, there are about 2.5 million in use around the world 
today, 85% of them in Latin America [3]. The ideas behind the project had been circulating among MIT’s computer science 
and design faculty and students for at least 35 years before 
OLPC’s unveiling, starting with a 1971 NSF research grant that MIT professor Seymour Papert received to design 
computers for education. 
The first author has been researching the OLPC project since 
2008. Her work includes seven months of ethnographic fieldwork of an OLPC project in Latin America, as well as 
ongoing archival research on the development of OLPC and 
the ideas behind it. The latter contributes to the arguments in this paper, focusing exclusively on the Boston-based founding 
group involved with design and development of OLPC’s XO 
laptops. 
National Day of Civic Hacking 
The first National Day of Civic Hacking (hackforchange.org) took place at 95 different locations across the United States on 
June 1-2, 2013. Local groups affiliated with the national 
movement independently organized events at each location. They designed the events to gather ‘hackers’ who were 
interested in applying their programming expertise to civic 
problems and issues. The event was endorsed by the White House and involved 26 government agencies or institutions 
that often provided a ccess to datasets.  
The third author collected online promotional and post-facto 
summary materials from events around the country and also 
conducted ethnographic observations at the ‘Hack the Rock’ 
event in Rockaway Beach, New York, a Queens neighborhood that was particularly hard hit by Hurricane Sandy. Much of the 
civic hacking going on that day in the Rockaways involved the 
design and development of tools to prepare for, survive, or recover from a future natural disaster.  
Fixit Clinic  
Since 2009, the East Bay Fixit Clinic has hosted ‘pop-up’ 
events dedicated to “the guided disassembly of your broken 
stuff,” as their tagline states. Roughly once a month, small groups of tech-savvy volunteers gather at local libraries, 
museums, and hackerspaces (community-operated workspaces 
most often dedicated to electronics tinkering) in the San Francisco Bay Area to help residents take apart and learn to fix 
their broken products.  
The second author conducted participant observation at seven 
repair events hosted by two repair collectives in the Bay Area and spoke with approximately 60 participants. She 
complemented her ethnographic work with extensive formal 
interviews with 20 participants, including leaders, organizers, 
Hacking and Making
CSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada
71activists, and attendees, whos e repair activities critically 
informed the development and maintenance of contemporary 
repair movements. Lastly, she conducted in-depth research in 
the Fixit Clinic and Repair Café's online archives and in individual participants’ collectio ns of artifacts and writings.  
Stanford d.school 
The Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford (or 
“d.school”) is an interdisciplin ary hub for Stanford students, 
industry executives, and design professionals to take classes in 
entrepreneurship and engineer ing. Affiliated faculty promote 
principles of ‘design thinking,’ a human-centered design methodology with origins in mechanical engineering and product design. While the institute itself does not grant degrees 
or hire tenure-track faculty,  its affiliations with the 
Departments of Engineering and Art enable enrolled graduate 
students to receive Masters Degrees in design through the Joint 
Program in Design.  
The second author conducted participant observation from 
December 2012 through June 2013 of a capstone course at the d.school called d.garage, and spoke with roughly 50 
participants at the Institute. She carried out interviews with 11 program affiliates, including leaders and students of the 
d.school and the Joint Program in Design. 
Methodology 
Collectively, this paper draws on archival research, discourse analysis, interviews, and ethnographic observations. The first 
author analyzed the forty-year development of the ideas behind OLPC’s ‘Children’s Machine’ via its documented history, the 
third author conducted observations and a discourse analysis of 
the events and media surrounding the National Day of Civic Hacking, and the second author made ethnographic 
observations of and interviews with participants and hobbyist 
fixers at the Fixit Clinic and teachers and students at the 
Stanford d.school. All observations were recorded as 
handwritten fieldnotes and interviews were audio recorded and transcribed. 
To analyze these data, we adopted an iterative, inductive 
approach common in anthropology and cultural studies, 
namely to combine a thorough understanding of participants’ worldviews with a more critical-theoretical interpretation of 
these worldviews as ‘texts’ able to expand or contest broader 
theoretical questions. This systematic approach is in keeping with the theory-building described in Michael Burawoy’s 
Extended Case Method [8], which outlines a rigorous reflexive 
alternative to the demands of positivist research. Instead of striving for reactivity, reliability, replicability and 
representativeness, all of which introduce highly problematic 
‘context effects’ (especially in qualitative research), the Extended Case Method acknowledges the inevitability of the 
researcher’s intervention , accounts for the process  of 
interpretation given participants’ contexts and histories, works 
toward identifying the underlying forces that structure 
everyday life (‘ structuration ’), and iteratively reconstructs  
social theory given one’s findings. Burawoy demonstrates that this reflexive approach “also seeks generalizable and falsifiable explanations … but true to its own principles, arises from a 
critical engagement with positive science” [8:11]. This 
orientation allowed us to begin reaching beyond a participant’s 
articulated values to identify mechanisms by which the groups commonly deployed ideas to defend the legitimacy of their 
practices and discourses. 
We employed the Extended Case Method over the course of 
several months in person and via a series of Google Hangout sessions, due to the distributed nature of our team. In early 
discussions, we analyzed our own and each other’s field data 
and jointly identified a host of common themes that had 
independently emerged in our projects. We also conducted an 
extensive literature review drawing in research from many different fields including HCI, media studies, anthropology, 
religious studies, communication, and sociology. Collectively 
reflecting on common themes and emergent syntheses, we hypothesized that the existence of these commonalities was 
due to the shared social context in which all of our field sites 
operate: American engineering culture. We then turned back to our data, where we iteratively discussed and further identified 
several forms of quasi-religious practices that appeared in each 
of our sites – practices, it is worth noting again, that occurred without prompting or intervention from us.  
QUASI-RELIGIOUSITY IN ENGINEERING WORLDS 
Our inductive process of synthesis and theorization resulted in 
the identification of three common themes across our data: 
practices of worship , practices of evangelism , and practices of 
addressing doubt. Collectively, these themes indicate a set of 
quasi-religious practices that extend across engineering worlds. 
Below, we show how the motivations and practices of the four engineering worlds we studied, though they may be framed by 
the participants themselves as ‘rational’ and evidence-based, 
resemble religious practice.  
Worship: the practices and rituals of faith 
Those who participate in the engineering worlds we studied confirm and renew their faith in technological practices via 
specific forms of worship. By worship  we mean ritualized 
practices of homage to particular beliefs important in the 
community, through either individual or collective rites [44]. 
In this section, we show how these practices create, reinforce, 
and highlight the shared experiences in each community, its reason for existence, and the individual reasons community 
members have for continuing their membership [19]. We also 
show how the narratives that structure and justify these practices become mythological in stature, doing work to 
maintain the group’s shared ideological framework.  
We will further see that by wa y of continued reproduction, 
these activities became legitimated and, at times, reified to the 
point of social exclusion or interactional difficulties with other 
groups. On the other hand, it is through this collective form of 
practice that a group comes to define, understand and enact its values and beliefs, which is an essential antecedent to 
maintaining a shared ideological framework and ultimately 
ensuring the sustainability of the group. 
Hacking and Making
CSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada
72Individual forms of worship 
Our first example of worship in engineering worlds involves 
the ritualized articulation of belief by individual members of engineering worlds. Among those involved with the One 
Laptop per Child (OLPC) project, it is commonly held that 
computers offer children unique opportunities for passionate play, enlightenment, and a connection to the sublime. This 
belief, formalized in OLPC’s mission statement [37], is 
legitimated by those in the community through providing ritualized examples of the centrality of computers in their own 
childhoods. This is framed by the community as rational evidence justifying their project  (despite its anecdotal and 
idiosyncratic nature [2]). However, telling the story of a 
childhood passion (often defiant [2]) for computers – whether 
on personal blogs, public OLPC mailing lists, or elsewhere –signals participants’ motivation for joining the project and the 
legitimacy of their membership in the congregation. By 
connecting themselves to a shared mythology that is so central to the community, clearly they belong. 
OLPC co-founder Seymour Papert, acknowledged by other 
founders as the intellectual father of the project, originated the 
form and substance of this cosmological myth in describing his 
close relationship with gears as an engineering-focused 
‘object-to-think-with,’ his childhood substitute for the not-yet-widespread computer. “ I fell in love with the gears, ” Papert 
explains, italics his, in his 1980 book Mindstorms . He 
continues, 
“This is something that cannot be reduced to purely ‘cognitive’ terms. Something very personal happened. … 
This book is the result of my own attempts over the past 
decade to turn computers into instruments flexible enough so that many children can each create for themselves 
something like what gears were for me.” [39:viii] 
Though Papert’s story does not involve computers, his entire 
career focused on applying his experience with gears to the computer, which he called “the Proteus of machines … [that] 
can appeal to a thousand tastes” [39:viii]. In a later book, The 
Children’s Machine (a direct reference to what would later 
become OLPC’s laptop), Papert explains that he came to believe that computers could fulfill this role in his experiences 
with the nascent MIT hacker community in the late 1960s. This community’s passionate play with computers, itself a kind 
of worship (and described in more detail in [28]), had a 
profound effect on Papert: 
“I had my first experience of the excitement and the 
holding power that keeps people working all night with 
their computers. I realized that children might be able to enjoy the same advantages – a thought that changed my 
life.” [40:13] 
The continued popularity of Papert’s ideas – within OLPC and 
beyond – attest to the power of the mythology that (some) children’s passionate play with computers is a path to the 
sublime. Indeed, Papert’s book Mindstorms could be regarded 
as a kind of ‘bible’ for the movement as it continues to 
circulate among those in the community and to be assigned in design and engineering classes, spreading the group’s mythology of finding oneself and connecting to like-minded 
others through the machine and the ideology underlying it 
along the way. (The text, in fact, is given to all incoming students at the MIT Media Lab, and one required assignment 
for first-year students is to write about what object served as 
their own personal ‘gears’ in their childhood.) This mythology served to link the passions of many of those involved with the 
project, as well as many of its greatest admirers. 
Technical practice as a form of worship is made even more 
overt at the Stanford Institute of Design (d.school) – and in 
these examples, the participants even stray from the ‘rational’ 
commitments to evidence in their unprompted use of religious language, though they continued to justify their passions with 
language of rationality. Teachers enthusiastically talk about 
how students “flip” – become converts to design thinking – in what one staff member and graduate of the d.school called a 
“hallelujah moment,” noting the number of people who have 
described the d.school philosophy as “cultish.” The founder of the d.school, David Kelley, himself admits that his belief in 
design thinking , the philosophy undergirding his pedagogical 
goals at the institute, is religious in nature – a parallel that was 
entirely unprompted:  
“This [design thinking] is my only organized religion in 
that way. … It’s like whatever religions do for you – 
whether it’s a crutch, whether it makes you feel good, or whether it just gets you through the day, view of afterlife, 
or whatever else – [for me it’s about] this whole notion of 
helping people through unlocking their creative ability. I mean, it’s got chemical  with me.” 
‘Getting chemical’ for Kelley was like falling in love with 
gears or the engrossing play with MIT’s mainframes for 
Papert: it involved a highly personal passion rooted in a sense 
of possibility that their object of worship provided them. And 
just as Papert shared this experience with others, Kelley sought to instill in students a faith that they too could ‘unlock their 
creative ability’ through design thinking, and moreover that 
these creative abilities could change the world. Kelley identified this feeling as his ‘only organized religion,’ 
recognizing the role of his faith in design thinking as a source 
of his motivation.  
A third example of worship comes from Chris Witt, a 
volunteer at the Fixit Clinic who took particular pleasure in 
reusing and repairing old bikes. He described his attachment to 
repair work as a kind of religious experience – though with a different kind of motivation. He explained (again, 
unprompted): 
“It took me a long time to realize that I don’t have any 
particular regard for any organized religion, but for me [repair work] has become, in a way, a kind of religious 
practice that I evolved without ever thinking of it that way. 
So there’s an amorphous mass of earth worshippers out 
there, and that’s not what I would call [repair work], but 
it’s as close as it gets.”  
Hacking and Making
CSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada
73Here, Witt admits that his repair work involved expressing 
adoration for the earth and the environment – he does not see 
himself as the same as ‘earth worshippers,’ but still, his 
devotion to repair is ‘as close as it gets.’ As a volunteer at the Fixit Clinic, he enacted this passion both with other volunteer 
‘coaches’ and with the visitors that he was there to help. This 
process enabled him to publicly sanctify his respect for the environment as a kind of religious practice. Though Witt’s 
interests lay resolutely outside organized religion, like Kelley 
he saw commonalities between his volunteer repair work and more traditional forms of faith-based worship.  
Communal forms of worship 
While some devotional practices – like Papert’s gears or Witt’s 
repair-work – are expressed individually or asynchronously, 
worshippers often value collective religious practice, whether expressed in thoughtful collective silence like the Quakers or 
exuberant songs like the Baptists. Thus, while worship is an 
individual religious expression, it is often enacted, strengthened, and shaped in the company of others [44]. 
Collective practices of worship occurred at a spring 2013 Fixit 
Clinic meeting at the Albany Community Center, which found 
the Clinic’s founder and lead organizer, Peter Mui, standing on 
a chair, his arms raised. “Ladies and gentlemen, start your 
repairs!” he called out after introducing the afternoon’s activities. The cacophony of repa ir activities fell to a hush 
during Mui’s introduction, and all eyes turned toward him. A similar speech marked the official beginning of each event, ritualistically transforming the crowd into a congregation with 
a common purpose. Mui later said he consciously used these 
introductions to set a particular tone for the meeting. 
Meeting together was similarly a critical part of the National 
Day of Civic Hacking. Organizers spoke of the need for 
“citizens” (primarily software developers) to be co-located in 
the ritualized practice of the hackathon as they strove to pound out viable and innovative solutions together. In Palo Alto, the 
convening was organized to not only to bring people together 
but to celebrate the city as well. Their hackathon took place outdoors in the beautiful California weather and was 
accompanied by family-friendly activities, a stage for TED-
like talks from local technological dignitaries, and a techie ‘farmer’s market’ where developers wandered among the stalls 
to exchange ideas or receive feedback from technologists 
rather than buying local produce. The ritualized forms of 
worship at work here were quintessentially Californian, 
bucking centralized and formal worship for outdoor marketplaces and egalitarian collaboration. 
Worship within engineering worlds thus takes place both at the 
individual and the community level. Engaging in shared rituals 
such as hacking, tinkering, designing or fixing together collectively motivates participation in the world, reinforces 
beliefs, and expresses devotion to the group. These moments 
also allow stories to circulate that can take on the form of mythologies, expressing on-the-surface values as well as 
tapping the underlying ideological framework of these groups. 
For programmers, a day of hack ing with fellow coders is simultaneously a time for reinforcing a mythology about the power of technical problem solving and the virtue of civic-
mindedness. Papert and his colleagues celebrated their 
devotion to computers together and younger contributors ritualistically connected their ecstatic childhood computer 
experiences to this culture, many of them wanting to give those 
same experiences to children around the world via OLPC, as we will see in the next section [28,40]. And at Stanford’s 
d.school, the communal practice of design, in and of itself a 
powerful example of worship, was further sanctified by its location in two highly ritualized spaces at the school, the 
classroom and design studio. These classes and studio spaces 
served to gather and connect students from across campus 
(through class enrollment) and across the world (through the 
design master’s program). Yet, given the high demand for design training, they also excluded individuals and groups that 
did not fit the school’s idea of a promising design student.  
We turn next to understanding how these individual and 
collective practices of devotion also produced tactics for spreading messages of faith beyond the bounds of these 
communities.  
Evangelism: bringing more people into the fold 
Members of engineering worlds are often ready evangelists 
with a zeal for converting non-believers to their worldviews. These practices are one of the normative aspects of an ideology 
[20]. The four engineering worlds we analyzed each engaged 
in practices of evangelism, including education, recruiting, and publicity, making this a goal within their respective 
communities. In contrast to faith, which is a personal, inward-
facing and sometimes exclusionary way of adhering to a set of beliefs, evangelism orients communal beliefs outward with an 
eye toward propagating the ideology through associated 
practices. Understood this way,  our analysis of evangelism 
bears resemblance to sociological studies of social movements 
(e.g., see [11,13]).  
Fixit Clinic founder Peter Mui explained some of his more 
evangelistic techniques in an interview. He said, 
“We also do that celebratory thing when people fix stuff. Okay? Because we want, we want to give this affirmation. 
This sort of ‘come to Jesus’ moment [laughs].” 
For Mui, coming to the Fixit Clinic meant learning to embrace 
an ideology of economic empowerment in which one could 
feel confident taking apart devices, figuring out how they were 
produced, and maybe even suggesting alternatives. He wanted participants’ experience of tightening a screw in a toaster that 
no longer heated, adding a bead of solder to a Bluetooth device 
without signal, or sewing a new buckle to a tattered leather boot to enable them to think differently about their 
consumption practices. If a person came away from the Clinic 
with additional technical skills as well, all the better. Using a triumphant disposition, Mui wanted to inspire a “moment” of 
change in people’s thinking that promoted a particular set of 
countercultural beliefs – an ideology – around consumption and engineering. 
Hacking and Making
CSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada
74A second example showcases the thin line between evangelism 
and worship. Stanford d.school founder David Kelley’s desire 
to see students “flip” into being design thinkers is at once an 
act of worship – tied to rituals of the classroom and design studio – and one of evangelism. He further explained the 
evangelistic aspect by discussing the magic of that conversion 
moment: 
“When students come up and I see their eyes sparkle and they say, ‘Oh my god. You know, when I came to Stanford 
I didn’t think this way at all and now I think this way…and 
I’m making better decisions and I’m going to change my 
job […]’ And they cry and whatever. That’s what I’m 
after. That’s the selfish part of this religion. It’s that I get to witness this kind of ‘flipping’ to feeling positively about 
themselves. So, if it’s not a religion, then it’s this kind of 
selfish gratification thing of as many people flip[ping] as possible.” 
More explicitly discussing his evangelistic ambitions, Kelley 
explained that he wanted to teach as many people as possible 
about design thinking because he considered it to be a powerful tool, again bringing up religious parallels without 
prompting: 
“I really believe that this can help people and so I want 
them to know that it exists. It is not religious in that it is forced – that this is the right one compared to any other. 
[…] It’s religious in the sense I want everybody to know 
about it.” 
The blurred boundaries of evangelistic worship at Stanford can be contrasted with the case of the all-night programming 
sessions that Papert and others in OLPC shared at MIT. There 
the practices of worship had no evangelizing function; they 
were comprehensible only those who were already steeped in 
the ideological framework of the community. 
Evangelism at the National Day of Civic Hacking was less 
overt than with Mui or Kelley, but the mythologies at play 
there still affected the tone of the whole event. Invitations to 
participate encouraged all citizens to get involved, irrespective of their technological abilities. At the same time, organizations 
with names such as Code for Good and Rally for Impact 
sponsored the events, and these names influenced participants’ interpretations toward a mythology central to hackathons that 
code ideated and (at least partially) developed in an afternoon 
could have a lasting impact, perhaps even more impact than 
the incremental results of long-standing nonprofits or advocacy 
groups. Altogether, this branding had a proselytizing influence 
promoting code as salvific, and moreover encouraged the involvement of a crowd self-selected to believe in such a 
mission. 
During observations at the Rockaways hackathon in Queens, 
New York, a steady stream of tech-sympathetic community members, like missionaries, came into the school to share their 
stories of devastation from Hurricane Sandy and to promote 
their latest ideas about what te chnological services might have 
been useful at the time. Their appeals helped to dissuade skeptical voices and set the tone for a charismatic afternoon. During the coding spree itself, the tenor of activity celebrated 
the value of efficient production, not deliberation. The motto 
set from the organizers -- “less yack, more hack” – kept people on the right path and dissuaded critical views or ongoing 
discussion. In this way, the timed and goal-driven structure of 
a hackathon helped to symbolize the tenets of this faith as ordered and rational – something driven by passion but kept in 
line by constraints. Nothing here  was too unfamiliar, critical, or 
disruptive, which was meant as a welcome invitation to tech-
curious neophytes. 
In the case of One Laptop per Child, the project’s central 
mission was one of evangelism. However, this proselytic drive ended up doing more than recruiting new members to the 
cause. Rather, some in the project allowed their zeal to make 
them less evidence-driven and more hostile to constructive criticism. After the OLPC project was announced in 2005, a 
number of journalists and academics (e.g. [4,29,45]) 
questioned whether money would be better spent on ensuring adequate food, sanitation, or ot her basic necessities instead of 
buying laptops for children. Responding with the same kind of “disruptive” rhetoric that portrays new technologies as being a “radical break from history” that many techno-utopian projects 
use in legitimating themselves [33], many of those leading or 
involved with OLPC talked about how their laptop was uniquely qualified to change the world by remaking children 
across the Global South in their own image [24,30,35]. Their 
laptop would let children learn how to program computers, which would naturally facilitate their becoming the same kind 
of ‘hackers’ as the developers themselves – a subject position 
they considered powerful, freeing, and altogether desirable to 
have, as we saw in the ideology undergirding their faith. This, 
in turn, would naturally lead to economic growth, no matter how disadvantaged or infrastructure-poor the area started. 
OLPC co-founder and leading evangelist Nicholas Negroponte 
articulated this view succinctly in a 2008 video OLPC posted on YouTube (http://youtube.com/watch?v=o97UD78s6iM): 
“[The XO laptop] is probably the only hope. I don’t want 
to place too much on OLPC, but if I really had to look at 
how to eliminate poverty, create peace, and work on the environment, I can’t think of a better way to do it.” 
Project co-founder and then-software director Walter Bender 
explained in a 2007 Radio Open Source interview how the 
machine could have these world-changing effects simply by children “be[ing] able to reach inside the machine … and 
touch it, and transform it, and explore it as deeply as they want 
to” [30]. What lay behind the evangelistic (not to mention technologically determinist) mythology that ameliorating 
issues of economic, cultural, and environmental import can be 
achieved by giving children open-source laptops is less a rational examination and more a highly personal, quasi-
religious set of worship practices between developers and their 
computers that they sought to spread.  
That spreading this worldview would also be a shortcut  to 
cultural and economic change was another notable feature of 
Hacking and Making
CSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada
75OLPC’s evangelistic beliefs [24,30,35]. In the same 2007 
Radio Open Source interview, Bender explained that OLPC 
was an “end-run around the status quo [to] move a little bit 
quicker to reaching more children” [30]. Both Bender and Negroponte referred to the project as a “Trojan Horse” [30,35], 
Bender elaborating that it was “a backdoor into overhauling 
the entire education system of a lot of the countries that we are talking about” [30], and Negroponte further explaining, “We 
need to reach the most children possible and leverage them as 
the agents of change” [35]. Here, again, we see this rhetoric framing a technological solution as radically breaking the rules 
that governed and constrained previous interventions, even when in reality it differed from other development projects 
only in hubris. This blind spot – the mythology that simply 
reaching children with OLPC’s laptops would overhaul national economies – anchors an ideology of technological 
determinism with a specific idea of how learning (or fixing or 
hacking) should be accomplished: in a very personal relationship between an individual and a computer, just as 
Papert, Negroponte, and others wrote about experiencing 
themselves in their practices of worship. 
Whether the ideologies in these communities reflected the 
belief that design thinking or programming can effectively 
solve problems that other approaches have not been able to, 
that fast action is preferable over careful deliberation, or that tinkering with electronics can usher in new worldviews, each 
group used some form of evangelism to celebrate the power of 
their engineering practices. Each of the communities we examined sought to spread their faith and practices of worship 
to new members, from community participants to university 
students to children in the Global South. Their zeal often led 
them to overstate the power of their solutions and ignore 
challenges or complications, even when their claims lacked evidence. Indeed, a common theme across these worlds, and in 
engineering worlds more generally, is that computer 
technologies represent such a radical break from the past and from other approaches that historical or comparative data 
provide nothing useful in understanding them. On the contrary, 
exploring the limits and ideological commitments of these groups serve to reconnect them to history and contextualize 
their “disruptive” rhetoric [33]. 
Both worship and evangelistic practices can be challenged or 
internally rejected, however. We next turn to examine the origin and nature of these challenges and to document the 
reparative practices these communities took on in response. 
The ideological work of addressing doubt 
Practices of worship and evangelism were not always met with 
complete acceptance, and sometim es particular events shook 
the faith of the group. While doubt was sometimes part of the 
ideological framework of the community itself – in other 
words, certain kinds of doubt were ‘orthodox’ – there were other instances where neophytes or even long-time acolytes 
lost their faith and challenged the ideological underpinnings 
that motivated the community, even asserting that the community was based more on faith than fact.  Doubt  highlights the translation-work that must occur between 
ideologies and the ‘messiness’ of everyday life, which may not 
always conform to ideological norms [16]. Cultural historian 
Bennett Berger develops the idea of ideological work  to 
describe this process. Ideological work can take the form of 
“selling out” (adjusting one’s beliefs to match circumstances) 
or “realizing” (adjusting circumstances to match one’s beliefs), but more often is instantiated as “accommodating,” or meeting 
in the middle [7:18–22]. In this section, we focus on the 
ideological work that doubt created, describing the responses the faithful made to shore up or reconcile their beliefs. This 
analysis also reveals that the responses of both doubters and 
the faithful lay bare additional blind spots around inclusivity 
and partiality in these engineering worlds.  
At the National Day of Civic Hacking, one kind of doubt was 
very much part of the fabric of the events themselves: doubt in the efficacy of government institutions. The hackers involved 
were, however, not cynical about state of affairs: they 
optimistically saw themselves as saviors for the perceived failures of today’s government structures, and their solutions as 
a path to civic redemption. They viewed an ability to hack as 
not only an opportunistic way to ‘act,’ but really the only way to have agency in civic matters. As with OLPC, technological 
solutionism was more akin to finding faith after having been 
tested in the wilderness: here, finally, is the way to move mountains; here, finally is a more direct channel to the 
sublime.  
Some voices, however, questioned this techno-fetishistic zeal, 
allowing us to observe how doubt and disbelief unfolded and was attended to. In a blog pos t entitled “Hacking for Good” 
(http://
 homecookedtheory.com/  archives/  2013/  06/  07/  hacking-
for-good), Melissa Gregg, a scholar at Intel Research, 
challenged the premise behind the National Civic Day of Hacking event she attended, wondering what made hacking in concert with government agencies and community members 
necessarily good. The larger community behind the event 
chose to simply ignore these critiques – likely something possible only because of the distributed nature of this 
engineering world and not a viable long-term form of 
ideological work – organizing a second event around the same ideological message (i.e., hacking as a civic virtue) for the 
summer of 2014. 
Like Gregg’s doubt of civic hacking, one of David Kelley’s 
students expressed doubt about the value that design thinking may actually provide at the Stanford d.school. While admitting 
that design thinking was ‘fun and interesting,’ he questioned 
whether it could have the amount of impact in the world that d.school teachers promised to their students. Bringing in 
religious language – again, without prompting – by comparing 
his teachers to preachers and their message to proselytizing, this student raised the heretical thought that their religious 
devotion to design thinking might be obscuring its limitations: 
“[Design thinking,] it’s preaching. It’s creating a religion 
that needs followers. It already has leaders but the leaders 
need people to follow them. So that I think [design 
Hacking and Making
CSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada
76thinking] does carry well [to other contexts] and it does do 
that, but it also doesn’t nece ssarily recognize how difficult 
it is to be good at it. … It seems like it’s not nearly that hard to be a priest. You stand in front of a group of people. You read a gospel. You have a book that tells you what to 
do. But there’s a lot to it I guess. Not just preaching, but 
doing the work. There’s a lot of design out there where people think they can do it, try to do it and it seems fun and 
interesting but it doesn’t really work as well… And to 
some degree I think the proselytizing may be masking that fact.” 
While this student’s doubt arose in the normal course of his studies, a community’s faith can also be shaken in response to a particular event, as was the case for OLPC. A defining 
moment for the OLPC community, one that tested the 
conviction of many involved, occurred in spring 2008. Negroponte had announced the ‘$100 Laptop’ three years 
earlier and the project had garnered gushing praise from 
engineering communities and the pr ess [4], if not the rush of 
country-scale orders that were expected. Still, the project’s 
commitment to open-source software, their focus on passionate 
learning with computers [40], and their bold rhetoric about overhauling education worldwide attracted a large and loyal 
following of employees, volunteers, and corporate 
contributors. 
Then, in a stunning reversal, Negroponte announced in spring 
2008 that he was in negotiations with Microsoft to put 
Windows on the XO laptop instead of Sugar, the in-house 
open-source platform built on Red Hat Linux. This unexpected move towards proprietary software undercut the faith in open-
source that had inspired many participants’ involvement in the 
project. Some participants fought back, publicly re-affirming 
their motivations for joining the project, while others quit the 
project altogether. Collective se ntiments were summed up on 
the Free Software Foundation website (http://
 fsf.org/  blogs/  rms/  
can-we-rescue-olpc-from-windows) by technology pundit and self-styled open-source ‘evangel ist’ Richard Stallman, who 
had previously been a vocal supporter of OLPC: 
“Since the OLPC was first announced we have envisioned 
it as a way to lead millions of children around the world to 
a life in which they do computing in freedom. … Proprietary software keeps users divided and helpless. … 
You might as well introduce the children to an addictive 
drug. If the XO turns out to be a platform for spreading the use of proprietary software, its overall effect on the world 
will be negative.”  
Stallman’s statements – equating proprietary software with an 
addictive drug – may seem extreme, and he was in fact ridiculed by some in the press for it. However, many others in 
the engineering worlds that had been supporting OLPC agreed 
with his statement. OLPC co-founder Walter Bender echoed Stallman in a post on the OLPC News blog (independent and 
often critical of the project; http://
 olpcnews.  com/  software/  
sugar/confessions_of_a_fundamentalist.html), articulating what OLPC should represent with a distinctly religious tone. Bender pushed back on a statement from Negroponte that the 
project was too full of open-source ‘fundamentalists’ by 
claiming that he was only a ‘fundamentalist’ about learning – 
but that the learning they wanted to enable was only possible with open-source software:  
“I am a fundamentalist – but in regard to what? Not 
software. I am a fundamentalist about learning! That is not 
to say I am not passionate about FOSS [free and open source software], but as the means, not the end, towards a 
‘constructionist’ learning model.” 
Bender echoes the religious language of ‘fundamentalism’ that 
Negroponte used as critique, but appropriates it as a positive 
trait, simultaneously drawing a boundary around what he 
understood as OLPC’s mission. After all, who could argue with being a ‘fundamentalist’ about learning?  
Here, Stallman and Bender both demonstrate the kind of 
ideological work faithful community members felt compelled 
to perform in order to defend their views of the OLPC project against challenges to the community’s ideologies. While some 
were puzzled by their urgency and vehemence, these 
statements, if interpreted with a religious lens, make sense: not only was the project under attack, but so too were the 
mythologies, the ideologies, the very faith of its true believers. 
Around the same time, one early and previously evangelistic 
employee [24] left OLPC. In a blog post (http://radian.org/ notebook/sic-transit-gloria-laptopi), he publicly questioned not 
only Negroponte but the whole premise of the project. This 
man’s crisis of faith resulted in the need for a different type of 
ideological work – work that ultimately rejected OLPC’s 
mission in light of the project’s new reality. He said, 
“My theory is that technical people, especially when 
younger, get a particular thrill out of dicking around with 
their software. Much like case modders, these folks see it 
as a badge of honor that they spent countless hours compiling and configuring their software to oblivion. Hey, 
I was there too. And the older I get, the more I want things 
to work out of the box.” 
These examples showcase how faith in the engineering worlds we studied was repaired, adapted, and even abandoned in 
response to challenges from without and within. The role of 
and response to doubt in these communities highlight the quasi-religious fervor that doubters can both uncover in their 
questioning and elicit in response. The ideological work that 
took place around incidents of doubt further enriches our understanding of how engineering worlds enforce mythologies 
that are used to motivate and re inforce their central ideologies. 
DISCUSSION 
These themes illustrate the ways in which quasi-religious 
practices substantively inform and facilitate many of the ideologies of engineering worlds. We have illustrated how our 
subjects inform their goals and discourses through practices of 
worship, evangelism and the ideological work of addressing 
doubt. Our data show that volunteer participants in fixing 
events and hackathons promote evangelistic messages 
Hacking and Making
CSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada
77extolling the virtues of rapid action and praising the ways that 
exploratory electronics tinkering can uncover new ways of 
seeing the world. In parallel, One Laptop per Child (OLPC) 
project adherents articulate their approach as the “one true path,” believing that programming and computer use is 
capable of solving problems that other approaches cannot. 
Finally, we note how Stanford Institute of Design educators are enraptured by the moments of conversion that their design 
thinking myths produced in their students, even as some in 
their flock questioned how zealous proselytizing might be concealing the limits of the method. 
These findings suggest not only evidence of quasi-religious 
behaviors and mythologies but also a rationale for seeking this evidence out. Understanding how forms of worship, 
evangelism and faith operate in engineering cultures can help 
scholars unpack the sociality, organization and praxis of engineering worlds in new ways. Identifying ideologies, in 
particular, which may otherwise be as invisible to those 
familiar with those worlds as water is to the proverbial fish [15:123], is especially important. Our intention is not to 
advocate for an eradication of ideologies; just as it is 
impossible to escape the bounds of our own subjective points of view, so too is it impossible to operate entirely outside of 
the frameworks of ideologies. However, a large body of 
Marxist theory (e.g. see [20]) notes that becoming cognizant of the ideological frameworks in which we operate allow us to 
evaluate whether they are really serving the purposes we hope 
or assume they are. Only by way of this cognizance can we shift them if they are not. 
So what have we learned about engineering worlds? Our 
religious framework surfaced faith-like practices that link 
aspects of technology innovation to worship, evangelism and 
ideological work. While the volunteers and contributors we 
studied may discount or overlook these insights, we contend that these practices reveal an understudied but necessary  part 
of technical work, namely the need within engineering worlds – particularly those building new tools and services – to establish foundational mythologies and modes of worship, 
influence anticipated beneficiaries, and test and reinforce 
values against doubt.  
The role of quasi-religious practice in engineering worlds 
Throughout our findings, we saw examples of how quasi-religious practices (worship, faith, evangelism) provided 
benefits to the communities in which they were enacted. For 
students at the Stanford d.school, for example, Kelley’s formulation of design thinking marked an evangelistic turn to 
user-centered product development. Contributors to the OLPC 
project used evangelism to affirm their belief in the power of computers in childhood and to push back against doubters, 
even in the face of what might otherwise feel like 
overwhelming odds. The use of quasi-religious behaviors not only contributed to community-building and other world-
changing activities, it also imposed coherence on situations 
that helped people persevere in the face of doubt and tackle seemingly impossible issues. In the groups we studied, this faith-based coherence played a positive role and demonstrated a unique generative power vis-à-vis  organizers’ beliefs. 
On the other hand, we saw that these behaviors could also 
restrict and narrow group membership, goals, and design 
possibilities, delimiting what engineers viewed as accomplishable and/or important. The same utopian zeal for 
design thinking, learning with computers, or democratizing 
technology that inspired our participants had a blinding effect when it prevented them from recognizing or appreciating 
ideological diversity, much less constructively confronting 
problems of socio-economic disparity, racial and gender bias, 
or other issues of social justice beyond most of their everyday 
experiences. 
Such limitations were most noticeable in the trenches of 
technology development. There, engineers who were largely 
male and upper or middle class envisioned cultural programs 
that reflected their own worldviews and ultimately served their own interests. In the groups we studied, this entailed helping 
those who already had leisure time and environmental 
convictions repair their own devices, building applications that reflected the civic identities of an entrepreneurial middle class, 
or trying to remake students at Stanford or children around the 
world in their own image. Echoing work by Oudshoorn, Rommes, and Stienstra [38], we found that the engineers 
involved in each of the projects we discussed adhered most 
passionately to tenets that mirrored their own ideologies, that echoed their own mythologies. These proclivities shaped the 
design of subsequent events, laptops, and software, but failed 
to account for the needs and diversity of ‘users’ who may have different views. 
It may appear that our findings apply primarily to zealous, 
volunteer-centric engineering communities, since three of our 
four field sites were such (with the exception of the d.school). 
We disagree. Based on ongoing interactions with a number of 
other engineering worlds, we posit that these practices can be found across American engineering culture more broadly. 
Indeed, given that the CSCW community is itself an 
engineering world, we wonder wh at this framework can tell us 
about ourselves as researchers and designers. To address this 
question, we turn next to the ways in which these quasi-
religious practices can extend CSCW’s analytical possibilities. 
The case for attending to ideologies in CSCW 
A number of frameworks within CSCW examine the values or practices of organizations, such as Values in Design (VID), 
discourse analysis, and Actor-Network Theory (ANT). While 
each of these approaches enables us to identify and reflexively account for the kinds of practices we have explored here, even 
collectively they overlook part of our story.  
For example, Value Sensitive Design (VSD) [18] and value 
discovery [12] have helped expose the articulated values and commitments extant in many engineering worlds. The VSD 
approach generally focuses on human values of “moral 
import” as classified by deontological and consequentialist moral philosophy [18:13], such as privacy, informed consent, 
Hacking and Making
CSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada
78human welfare, sustainability, an d justice. Within this work, 
researchers have tended to interpret the concept of values 
(cognitive, moral, aesthetic) as deep or sacred properties of 
one’s humanity. However, we find that the ideological commitments that undergird these values often remain taken-
for-granted and underexposed. Furthermore, these frameworks 
have trouble explaining the processes of value production and maintenance – values in collective praxis.  
Our perspective augments the core work of attending to values 
in design by recognizing the importance of focusing on how 
such values emerge from practice. Rather than values-in-
design(ed) objects , the notion of values-in -(design)  practice  
helps explicate the ideological norms that make certain cultural 
values natural, commonsense, or even invisible – just as the 
‘Protestant Ethic’ makes certain values-in-practice such as 
industriousness seem natural and inevitable in American culture more broadly. As with attending to the underlying 
‘design ethos’ that drives (certain kinds of) innovation in 
engineering worlds [22], a values-in-practice perspective regarding technology design and development yields insights 
even when values do not clearly make it “into” designers’ and 
developers’ products. In fact, our approach attends to values even when they may not even be clearly articulated as ‘values.’ 
Discourse analysis likewise exposes how actors discursively 
construct a particular reality to reify common ideals, influence 
outcomes, and shape shared ideological structures [14]. Though this approach accounts for the deployment of ideology 
in discourse, it largely overlooks the explicit connections 
between discourse and ideology -in-action  – in our case, how 
ideologically-motivated practices co-constitute modes of 
innovation and social organization, as well as social cognition 
[14]. Though our analysis often draws on the rhetoric of 
leaders and other highly visible members of the engineering 
worlds we studied, this rhetoric illuminates practices of these individuals and groups, such as the passionate computer play 
or ‘fundamentalist’ re-appropriatio n in OLPC, or the ‘come to 
Jesus’ moments in the design classroom or repair clinic.  
Conversely, engagements with ANT often emphasize the 
mobilization and enrollment of actors (both human and 
nonhuman/technological) in the form of actor-networks, but 
here too the beliefs, values and mythologies that underlie these networks often go neglected, especially if these ideas do not 
take material form [27:2]. Indeed, Callon’s 
ethnomethodological turn to advocate the use of actors’ own categorizations of the world to structure research [9] may 
obscure these actors’ ideological commitments via 
categorizations they may not rea lize they are making, just as 
VID favored explicitly recogn ized over implicit values. 
Finally, while an ANT framework provides constructive tools for analyzing the ‘scripts’ that designers build into technologies [1], it falls short of providing the means to 
account for how these ideological frameworks animate or 
inhabit these practices or products, making this aspect of the 
actor-network easily overlooked and thus uncritically assumed.  In contrast, our work reveals not only how illustrative but 
important it is, especially politically, to expose the ideologies 
in play in engineering worlds. This is a subject that Maher, a 
scholar of the open-source software community, claims “is all too often limited to impoverished discussions that emphasize 
instrumental efficacy at the expense of critical and rhetorical 
awareness” [31:369]. The kinds of ideologies we have detailed in this paper not only expose our participants’ beliefs and 
related practices, but they also help make sense of them within 
broader ideological movements in which they are situated – oftentimes movements that participants may not actively 
articulate or even be aware of. In other words, we show that 
our subjects are embedded in the wider ideological space of 
American engineering culture, which informs the local 
ideological space instantiated within disparate engineering communities. The common quasi-religious behavior across all 
four of our otherwise quite different ‘congregations’ serves to 
illustrate the existence and organi zational reach of this shared 
ideological creed. 
While it may seem difficult to identify ideological frameworks 
when our subjects and participants are themselves not aware of 
them, we believe that it is strategically possible to do so. Indeed, we have some tips for interested researchers. Attending 
to points in the data where participants fall back on ritualized 
stories or behaviors that cannot quite be explained ‘rationally’ – instances that might be considered types of worship, 
evangelism, or ideological work/faith repair – provides a 
fruitful avenue to start. In particular, we suggest that researchers zero in on points of friction or doubt within a 
community (as well as the concomitant response) as a way of 
bringing ideological commitments to the surface. 
It is also wise to follow where the data take you. To our 
surprise, some participants (e.g. Kelley of the d.school, Witt of 
the Fixit Clinic) drew their own direct parallels between their work and religious practice, whereas others made use of 
religious metaphors to explain their goals (e.g. Mui of the Fixit 
Clinic), especially when their belief systems were challenged 
(e.g. Bender of OLPC). While these participants may or may 
not recognize the norms undergirding their statements as 
ideological in nature (recall Hall’s emphasis that ideologies often appear natural and inevitable to those immersed in them), 
their unprompted words gave us clues for what to attend to in 
our analysis. Moreover, their religious statements could be interpreted as themselves assertions of the faithful in the face 
of (potential) doubt – from us as researchers. We drew 
connections between these empirical results and the sociological and critical sc holarship on ideologies and 
engineering worlds to surface the ideological undercurrents at play in these communities. 
Our attention to the mythologies  that circulated in the 
communities we studied – of the computer-obsessed child or 
the empowered designer – also showed us how communities 
strengthened and spread their belief systems through 
narratives. We could then follow these threads throughout our f
ieldwork, interviews, and archival research to uncover broader 
Hacking and Making
CSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada
79ideological frameworks. Attending to these mythologies is thus 
another strategy for examining the ideologies of engineering 
worlds. 
Within CSCW, attending to ideologies can help researchers 
identify important mechanisms through which groups cohere and validate themselves or disband and dissolve, as it has in 
the social sciences. Emerging social movements increasingly 
draw on engineering discourses to legitimate their claims, so understanding these ideologies is particularly important. Still, 
the tacit nature of many ideologies can make them more 
difficult to ‘harness’ productively: the jump from these 
identifications to productive suggestions can be especially 
difficult, and something with which social science has wrestled for decades [20].  
Future work could explore this avenue, along with other 
questions such as: what fost ers greater commitment among 
participants in a ‘hackathon’ and how might the event’s 
branding undermine or reinforce participants’ own experience 
of their work? Or how might the ritual display of ideological 
commitments help support the growth and maintenance of social movements? Are there more direct parallels between the 
strategies of organized religion and social organization, and if 
so, what might we learn from those parallels?  
Overall, we hope that our results can serve to ‘make the 
familiar strange,’ as Stuart Hall would say [20], for researchers 
in CSCW to address these and other questions raised by 
attending to ideologies. While concrete design suggestions are not the goal of this paper, we also hope that this work helps 
designers – who often hope to ‘do good’ through technological 
intervention in ways similar to those in the communities studied here – identify their own ideological commitments. 
CONCLUSION 
A central goal of this work has b een to investigate, articulate 
and demystify the ideologies of engineering worlds, as demonstrated through common quasi-religious behaviors and mythologies. With this lens, we interpreted the empirical data 
from four research sites to identify the beliefs and meanings 
espoused by our participants. Analysis of each project revealed that religious sentiments such as passion, conviction, and belief 
serve as forces that help participants express core convictions, 
recruit followers and maintain motivation in the face of great odds, critique, or conflicting evidence. Our point in this 
exposition is not to reduce ideology to an ‘objective’ religious 
formulation or undervalue its cultural power, nor is it to 
suggest that with quasi-religious behaviors these communities 
are somehow ‘wrong’ or ‘non-modern’ [26]. After all, Berger writes, “religion is perhaps the strongest example of symbolic 
meanings exercising causal force in private and public life” 
[7:151–152]. Rather, we have looked to religion as an important, culturally salient framework too often overlooked in 
the attempt to discuss the ideologies inherent in the seemingly 
neutral tenets and practices of engineering and design.  
If we were to turn our gaze to our own field of CSCW, might 
these kinds of religious inclinations be equally prevalent? Might the analysis of those tendencies enable us to recognize the prioritization of particular populations or identify central 
blind spots within our field? If we were to follow Donna 
Haraway – a scholar known for her defining feminist critiques of science and technology – we might answer yes. “All 
Western cultural narratives about objectivity,” she writes, “are 
allegories of the ideologies governing the relations of what we call mind and body, distance and responsibility” [21:583]. 
While we chose to examine other engineering groups in this 
paper, understanding the ramifications of quasi-religious practices within the engineering worlds we inhabit could shed 
further light on the underlying ideologies at stake, such as how design practices privilege and prioritize certain types of users. 
To do this, we might take into account not only the identity 
[38] of community members and their professed values but also their often taken-for-granted systems of belief, 
foundational myths, strategies for keeping their faith, and 
motivations for evangelizing their views – in other words, their ideologies-in-practice. While this discussion could be very 
important to our field, it is beyond the scope of our analysis 
here and we leave it  to future work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work is indebted to the friends, colleagues, and anonymous reviewers who pushed us to develop and clarify 
our ideas, including Megan Finn, Pernille Bjorn, and Lilly 
Irani. Thanks also to Katie Shilton for helping with NDoCH data collection. And as always, we thank our participants, 
without whom this work would not have been possible. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Akrich, M. The De-Scription of Technical Objects. In W.E. 
Bijker & J. Law, eds., Shaping Technology . MIT Press, 
1992. 
[2] Ames, M.G., Rosner, D.K. From Drills to Laptops: 
Designing modern childhood imaginaries. Information, 
Communication & Society 17 , 3 (2014), 357–370. 
[3] Ames, M.G. Translating Magic: The Charisma of OLPC’s XO Laptop in Paraguay . In E. Medina, I. da C. 
Marques, and C. Holmes, eds., Beyond Imported 
Magic: Essays on Science, Technology, and Society in Latin America.  MIT Press, 2014. 
[4] Ananny, M. The $100 Laptop: Trojan Horse, Piñata or 
Social Movement? Europe , (2005), 1–16. 
[5] Becker, H.S. Art Worlds.  U. California Press, 1982. 
[6] Bell, G. No More SMS from Jesus: Ubicomp, Religion and Techno-spiritual Practices. Proc. Ubicomp 2006 , 
ACM Press, 141–158. 
[7] Berger, B. The Survival of a Counterculture: 
Ideological Work and Everyday Life Among Rural 
Communards.  Transaction Publishers, 1981. 
[8] Burawoy, M. The Extended Case Method. Sociological 
Theory  16, 1 (1998), 4–33. 
[9] Callon, M. Some Elements of a Sociology of 
Translation: Domestication of the Scallops and the 
Fishermen of St Brieuc Bay. In J. Law, ed., Power, 
Action and Belief: A New Sociology of Knowledge?  
Hacking and Making
CSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada
80Routledge, 1986, 196–233. 
[10] Campbell, H.A., La Pastina, A.C. How the iPhone 
Became Divine: New media, religion and the 
intertextual circulation of meaning. New Media & 
Society  12, 7 (2010), 1191–1207. 
[11] Cohen, R., Rai, S.M. Global Social Movements: 
Towards a cosmopolitan politics. In Global Social Movements.  Athlone Press, 2000, 1–17. 
[12] Le Dantec, C.A., Poole, E.S. , Wyche, S.P. Values as 
lived experience. Proc. CHI 2009,  ACM Press, (2009), 
1141. 
[13] Dearden, A. and Walker, S. Designing for Civil Society. Proc. HCI 2003 , 157–158. 
[14] Van Dijk, T.A. Discourse Analysis as Ideology Analysis. In C. Schäffner and A. Wenden, eds., Language and Peace. Dartmouth Publishing, 1995, 17–
33. 
[15] Dobrin, S.I. Constructing Knowledges: The Politics of 
Theory-Building and Pedagogy in Composition.  SUNY 
Press, 1997. 
[16] Dourish, P., Bell, G. Divining a Digital Future: Mess 
and Mythology in Ubiquitous Computing.  MIT Press, 
2011. 
[17] Durkheim, E. Elementary Forms of Religious Life.  
George Allen & Unwin Ltd, 1915. 
[18] Friedman, B., Kahn, P.H., Borning, A. Value-Sensitive Design and Information Systems. In P. Zhang and D. Galletta, eds., Human-Computer Interaction in 
Management Information Systems: Foundations.  M.E. 
Sharpe, Inc., 2006. 
[19] Gerber, E. Devotion to an Innovation Process: The 
Case of Human Centered Design. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, 2007. 
[20] Hall, S. The Rediscovery of ‘Ideology’: The Return of the Repressed in Media Studies. In M. Gurevitch, T. Bennett, J. Curran and J. Woollacott, eds., Culture, 
Society, and the Media. Methuen, 1982, 56 –90. 
[21] Haraway, D. Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial 
Perspective. Feminist Studies  14, 3 (1988), 575–599. 
[22] Irani, L. Designing Citizens in Transnational India.  
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 2013. 
[23] Kelly, K. Nerd theology. Technology in Society  21, 4 
(1999), 387–392. 
[24] Krstic, I. Google EngEDU Tech Talk: Ivan Krsti ć. 
2
007. 
[25] Lam, P.-Y. May the Force of the Operating System be 
with You: Macintosh Devotion as Implicit Religion. 
Sociology of Religion  62, 2 (2001), 243–262. 
[26] Latour, B. We Have Never Been Modern.  Harvard 
University Press, 1993. 
[27] Law, J. Notes on the Theory of the Actor Network: 
Ordering, Strategy and Heterogeneity. Systems 
Practice  5, 4 (1992), 379–393. 
[28] Levy, S. Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution. 
Anchor Press Doubleday, 1984. [29] Luyt, B. The One Laptop per Child project and the Negotiation of Technological Meaning. First Monday  
13, 6 (2008). 
[30] Lydon, C. One Laptop Per Child? 2007. http://radioopensource.org/one-laptop-per-child/. 
[31] Maher, J.H. The Tech nical Communicator as 
Evangelist: Toward Critical an d Rhetorical Literacies 
of Software Documentation. Journal of Technical 
Writing and Communication  41, 4 (2011), 367–401. 
[32] Mickey, S.F. Constructing The Prophet: Steve Jobs 
and the Messianic Myth of Apple . 2013. 
[33] Mosco, V. The Digital Sublime: Myth, Power, and 
Cyberspace.  MIT Press, 2005. 
[34] Muniz Jr., A.M., Schau, H.J. Religiosity in the Abandoned Apple Newton. Journal of Consumer 
Research  31, (2005), 737–747. 
[35] Negroponte, N. Email attachment. devel, sugar, community-news mailing lists, 2008. http://lwn.net/Articles/279288/. 
[36] Noble, D.F. The Religion of Technology: The Divinity 
of Man and the Spirit of Invention . Penguin, 1999. 
[37] OLPC staff. OLPC Mission: Frequently Asked 
Questions. OLPC Website, 2012. 
http://laptop.org/en/vision/mission/faq. shtml#faq5. 
[38] Oudshoorn, N., Rommes, E., Stienstra, M. Configuring 
the User as Everybody: Gender and Design Cultures in 
Information and Communication Technologies. Science, Technology & Human Values 29, 1 (2004), 
30–63. 
[39] Papert, S. Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and 
Powerful Ideas. Basic Books, 1980. 
[40] Papert, S. The Children’s Machine:  Rethinking school 
in the age of the computer.  Basic Books, 1993. 
[41] R
obinson, B. Apple and the religious roots of 
technological devotion.  LA Times , 2013. 
[42] Stahl, W.A. God and the Chip: Religion and the 
Culture of Technology. Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1999. 
[43] Strauss, A. A Social World Perspective. Studies in 
Symbolic Interaction  1, (1978), 119–128. 
[44] Weber, M. The Sociology of Religion . Beacon Press, 
1993. 
[45] Winters, N. and Ananny, M. Development Ideologies of the One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) Programme. 2007. 
[46] Woodruff, A., Augustin, S., Foucault, B. Sabbath Day Home Automation: “It’s Like Mixing Technology and Religion.” Proc. CHI 2007 , ACM Press, 527–536. 
[47] Wyche, S.P., Aoki, P.M., Grinter, R.E. Re-placing faith: Reconsidering the Secular-Religious Use Divide in the United States and Kenya. Proc. CHI 2008, ACM 
Press, 11–20. 
[48] Wyche, S.P., Grinter, R.E. Extraordinary Computing: 
Religion as a Lens for Reconsidering the Home. Proc. 
CHI 2009,  ACM Press, 749–758. 
 
Hacking and Making
CSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada
81