14interaction s... january 1996
Photo: © Graphistock / Paul Christensen15interaction s... januar y 1996Recently I had the privilege of wor king with a
group of usability pr ofessionals r epresenting the
Human F actors E rgonomics S ociety (HFES)
ANSI 200 committee. I was invited to par tici-
pate as a technical advisor for the accessibilitysection of the ANSI 200 standar d. You can only
imagine my feelings of elation as w e wor ked on
a standar d that could effect the liv es of millions
of people with disabilities in a v ery positiv e way .
Unfortunately , this experience tends to be the
exception rather than the r ule. Why is it that so
few pr oducts and inter faces include accessible
design? The pr oblem lies not in the “ why” but
the “when.” H ow ironic! F or years usability engi -
neers hav e fought to help traditional engineers
appreciate the v alue in designing first, dev elop-
ing second. A t a minimum, design and dev elop
concurr ently. Yet, when it comes to designing for
people with disabilities, the popular terms ar e
“adaptiv e” and “ assistiv e”; quite simply , design
that occurs after pr oduct inception.
Let me expand on this just a little mor e.
Woodson defined human factors engineering as
“…the practice of designing pr oducts so that
users can per form r equir ed use, operation, ser -
vice, and suppor tive tasks with a minimum of
stress and maximum of efficiency .” [1]
Additionally , commenting on user inter face
design, B renda Laur el noted that, “ the goal of
all our effor ts, is to empo wer the user .” [2]
Laurel also noted that “ As computer technology
has become av ailable to mor e and mor e people
in a gr eater v ariety of devices and contexts, the
need for accessibility…has gr own mor e and
more pronounced.” This is, in effect, the v ery
essence of user center ed design (UCD); placing
the needs and r equir ements of the user at the
center of the design pr ocess.
To the person with a disability , however, the
concept and practice of user center ed design is
generally per ceived as a no velty, albeit a “Cav e
of W onders.” Assistiv e and adaptiv e technologyhave become the acceptable norm while accessi -
ble design has become the usability orphan.
Designing for people with disabilities is, in
fact, just an extension of human factors engi -
neering. A ccessibility engineers emplo y the
same usability methods and techniques used todesign and test inter faces for able-bodied per -
sons. M y own personal experience has taught
me that I simply need to be mor e “sensor y-
aware.” I call this the “hear no evil, see no evil,
speak no evil ” design method. When an inter -
face is designed and tested so that it achiev es
independent use b y the deaf , the blind, and
others with assor ted disabilities, it is tr uly an
accessible human inter face.
In order to accomplish optimal user center ed
design that includes people with disabilities,Human Computer I nterface G roups should
consider the P ervasive Accessible T echnology
(PAT) strategy . PAT is built upon two major
components:
1. The S tandar d Human I nterface (SHI)
2. An A ccessible I nformation T echnology
Infrastr uctur e (AITI)
Pervasive Accessible T echnology or P AT is a
technology I first hear d proposed b y the late
David S tone at the 1991 W orld Congr ess on
Technology for P eople with D isabilities. P AT is
a technology in which persons with disabilitiesuse standar d human inter face devices to com -
municate with an information technologyinfrastr uctur e that kno ws ho w to adapt to the
user. The IT inter face emplo ys an intelligent
agent that adapts to the user rather than r equir -
ing that the user adapt to the infrastr uctur e.
This should be the v ery cor e of next-generation
inter faces, par ticularly the often discussed,
Global I nformation I nfrastr uctur e (GII).
The per vasive accessible technology
ackno wledges (as does the GII) a S tandar dDesigning for P eople W ith Disabilities  Michael G. P acielloperspectiv es16interaction s... januar y 1996Human I nterface. The standar d human inter -
face includes micr ophones, speakers, touch
screens, glidepoint touchpads, kiosks, infrar ed
devices, and video cameras (among otherthings). These capabilities, if suppor ted b y the
right standar ds and an accessible infrastr uctur e,
have the potential of being accessible to the v ast
majority of people with disabilities.
For the standar d human inter face, w e need
to dev elop standar d programming inter faces for
all the capabilities including speech, video andtouch, as w ell as for an accessible access por t.
We also need to build multimedia capabilities
into the human inter face model.
The last—and cr ucial—component is the
accessible frame work that wraps itself ar ound
the data and the applications. This is the acces -
sible information infrastr uctur e. This frame -
work is the equiv alent of a personal interpr eter
for the person who is using the system. Eachperson has his or her o wn frame work; one that
knows what language they speak, what alphabetthey use, and what accessibility ser vices they
prefer. In this model, accessible technology is
not only per vasive, it’s accessibility is non-dis -
criminator y and totally transpar ent to users.
In the accessible information technology
infrastr uctur e (AITI), w e need to dev elop a set
of standar d accessibility ser vices that can be
found on all platforms in the infrastr uctur e.
These standar ds must be built upon usability
foundation stones, including efficiency , effec -
tiveness, and flexibility . We also need a set of
data and document ar chitectur es that allo w us
to maintain accessible data and documents.Something much mor e than the H yperT ext
Markup Language (HTML). S omething mor e
robust and flexible than the curr ent
Standar dized G eneral M arkup Language
(SGML) or it ’s included accessible standar d, the
ICADD22T (I nternational Committee for
Accessible D ocument D esign).
The least-cost, most-efficient way of pr oviding
high-quality accessibility is one that integrates
accessibility dir ectly into the infra -
structur e. U sability gr oups should
develop a w ell planned strategy that
implements P ervasive A ccessible
Technology (P AT), a technology that
implements a standar d human inter -
face and env elopes an accessible infor -
mation technology infrastr uctur e.
Indeed the challenge of designing
next-generation inter faces that ar e
accessible to all people, includingpeople with disabilities is to makeprovisions for integrating personal
assistiv e products as fr ont ends or
access por ts to technology , and mak -
ing information technology per va-
sively “disability-friendly!” 
References:
Woodson, W esley E. H uman F actors
Design H andbook: I nformation and
Guidelines for the D esign of
Systems, F acilities, E quipment, and
Products for H uman U se. N ew York:
McGraw-H ill, 1981. 
Laurel, Brenda The Ar t of H uman-
Computer I nterface D esign.
Addison-W esley P ublishing
Company , Inc. 1990.[2][1]
Michael G. Paciello
Digital Equiptment Corp.
Nashua, NH
paciello@shane .
enet.dec.com
In a futur e article the
author will discuss a specific
strategy for designing to the
Pervasive Accessible
Technolog y standar d.