Religion and Women’s Intimate Health: Towards an Inclusive 
Approach to Healthcare 
Maryam Mustafa Kimia Tuz Zaman Tallal Ahmad 
maryam_mustafa@lums.edu.pk kimia.tuz@northsouth.edu tallal.ahmad@lums.edu.pk 
Lahore University of Management North South University Lahore University of Management 
Sciences Dhaka, Bangladesh Sciences 
Lahore, Pakistan Lahore, Pakistan 
Amna Batool Masitah Ghazali Nova Ahmed 
abatool@umich.edu masitah@utm.my nova.ahmed@northsouth.edu 
University of Michigan Universiti Teknologi Malaysia North South University 
Ann Arbor, United States School of Computing Malaysia Dhaka, Bangladesh 
Johor, Malaysia 
ABSTRACT 
We present fndings from a three country study exploring the in-
tersection between female intimate health and religious beliefs. 
Through a qualitative study with Muslim female populations in 
Pakistan, Bangladesh and Malaysia, three diferent Muslim majority 
contexts, we examine the deep impact Islamic beliefs have on female 
intimate health and well-being. Our study investigates the percep-
tions, attitudes and behaviours of Muslim women to their own 
intimate and sexual bodies through their experiences of menarche, 
marriage and reproduction and menopause. The intersection of reli-
gion and female sexual bodies and health is a neglected area within 
HCI and we highlight how inextricably specifc Islamic values are 
linked with women’s reproductive health in Muslim communities. 
We further discuss the opportunities and challenges of designing 
technologies for religious, non-secular beliefs and values with the 
aim to improve intimate health practices amongst Muslim women 
and to broaden the scope of health design within HCI. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → Human computer interac-
tion (HCI). 
KEYWORDS 
religion, Islam, women’s health, health design, menarche, menopause 
ACM Reference Format: 
Maryam Mustafa, Kimia Tuz Zaman, Tallal Ahmad, Amna Batool, Masitah 
Ghazali, and Nova Ahmed. 2021. Religion and Women’s Intimate Health: 
Towards an Inclusive Approach to Healthcare . In CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21), May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan. 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445605 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM 
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specifc permission and/or a 
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8096-6/21/05...$15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445605 1 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years there has been a growing focus in HCI on research 
related to women’s health with a particular emphasis on intimate 
care [67, 69], maternal health [20, 41] and sexual well being [21, 38]. 
Additionally, over the last several years a great deal of attention 
has also focused on improving maternal health outcomes and in-
timate health in the Global South [1, 41, 47, 55] with important 
research emerging from India, Bangladesh and Pakistan. These stud-
ies engage with health through multiple intersections and lenses 
including but not limited to patriarchy, cultural taboos, literacy 
and poverty. While these are vital intersections to engage with 
when designing health interventions we propose that religious be-
liefs are another vital but often ignored intersection for designing 
meaningfully for intimate and sexual health. The experiences and 
perceptions of the body’s physical, emotional and mental existence 
are always moderated and determined by the broader socio-cultural, 
political, and historical contexts. To fully understand the landscape 
of women’s health it is important pay attention to characteristics 
such as race, ethnicity, socio-ecomomic status and sexual orien-
tation but also core religious values and beliefs [5]. The feld of 
medicine and public health has long engaged with religion as an 
important factor for understanding female intimate and sexual 
health [10, 39, 40, 56] and leveraged these beliefs to improve adop-
tion and uptake of health care services and practices. 
Studies on religious beliefs and practices reveal the infuential 
role religion plays in people’s everyday lives and its vital impor-
tance in shaping people’s attitudes and behaviour [19, 34]. Although 
in recent years there has been a call for action with respect to ex-
panding the scope of HCI research to include religious beliefs and 
practices [15, 32, 48] with the frst Islamic HCI workshop taking 
place in 2020, the HCI community by and large has shied away 
from engaging with religion as an important determinant for un-
derstanding health practices amongst women, particularly in the 
Global South. Our work looks to fll this gap and explores the inter-
section of intimate health, sexuality and religious beliefs in Pakistan, 
Bangladesh and Malaysia. These are Muslim majority countries 
where Islam is the dominant religion. 
An exploration of the intersection of Islamic beliefs and fe-
male health is particularly important given the current state ofCHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Mustafa et al. 
health and survival amongst Muslim women. According to the 
2020 Global Gender Gap index (an index designed to measure gen-
der equality), some of the countries that score the worst out of 
153 countries on the Health and Survival index are Muslim ma-
jority like Azerbaijan (ranked at 152), Pakistan (ranked at 149), 
Maldives(ranked at 147), Bahrain (ranked at 146), Albania (ranked 
at 145), Kuwait (ranked at 143) and Qatar (ranked at 142) just to 
name a few [27]. The vital role that religion values play in women’s 
health has previously been highlighted by medical researchers 
looking to understand the lack of uptake of preventative measures 
such as breast exams, mammograms, and cervical cancer screening 
amongst Muslim Women in the US and Canada [2, 43, 44]. 
There are approx. 1.6 billion Muslims (23%) world-wide [30] and 
the Islamic faith while diverse in its implementation and practice 
has core underlying principles that a majority of Muslims adhere 
to regardless of sect or country. These shared values include the 
concept of ‘Purdah’ - which literally means ‘curtain’ and is widely 
practiced in all three countries to seclude women and to enforce 
high standards of modesty [53]. As relating to female bodies, mod-
esty is given paramount importance in the Islamic faith and has 
a direct impact on how women view their own bodies, sexuality 
and intimate health. Similarly, Islam has deeply held beliefs and 
principles on how to deal with pain, misfortune and the vital impor-
tance of the body. The body is considered an Amaanah (a loan) and 
therefore a great deal of emphasis is placed on taking care of it [51]. 
These beliefs about illness, values like modesty, and ethico-legal 
guidelines related to therapeutics, infuence health and healthcare-
seeking behaviors across the Muslim diaspora. These beliefs are 
also central to Muslim women’s identities and their interactions 
with the world around them including their health care practices 
and mechanisms for information seeking and knowledge sharing 
with regards to intimate or sexual health. 
In a recent special issue on HCI and the Body: Reimagining 
Women’s Health [5] a call to action was made to move towards 
a new feminist health politics in HCI - one that does not assume 
a ’neutral’ user in the design of technologies, particularly when 
such users "often hold the unmarked position of an able-bodied 
cis-male from the middle class in the Western parts of the Global 
North." Our work answers this call and aims to expand the body 
of HCI literature that explores how women engage with their own 
bodies and encourages HCI researchers to rethink the relationship 
between health and the body from a perspective diferent from the 
current secular discourse on health and the body. 
We conducted a qualitative study in Pakistan, Bangladesh and 
Malaysia that (a) examines the perception women have of their own 
bodies and sexuality (b) identifes the relationship between their 
core religious values and their sexual health and (c) their existing 
mechanisms for seeking health care in light of their beliefs. Our 
study does not focus only on menstruation or a specifc phase of a 
woman’s sexual life-cycle. Instead we explore Muslim women’s per-
ceptions, attitudes and behaviours across three phases of her sexual 
life; menarche, sexual activity and child bearing and menopause. 
Based on the insights from this work we present a set of guidelines 
to the HCI community regarding the design of health applications 
for Muslim women. We generalize from our data specifc insights 
that are applicable to Muslim women not just in our studied con-
texts, but women who follow the Islamic faith in all contexts. Our broader goal is to create new understandings of what should count 
as medically signifcant and vital to designing persuasive health 
technologies for Muslim women specifcally, but also broadly for 
women who follow specifc belief systems and values. 
2 RELATED WORK 
Over the last several years there has been a growing body of work in 
HCI that focuses on female intimate health, in particular menstrual 
health in culturally diverse populations. We begin by summarizing 
this work and highlighting how our own study expands this body 
of work in novel and unique ways. We also explore some of the 
more popular female health tracking apps to highlight the gaps 
that exist in their design with respect to specifc populations. 
2.1 Female Intimate Health 
HCI has increasingly become more engaged with exploring percep-
tions and attitudes towards female intimate health. In 2016 Almeida 
et al. explored female intimate health and revealed how lack of 
body knowledge as a result of the taboo nature of female intimate 
body parts create conditions that directly lead to reduced health 
experiences. They made a resounding call to action to the HCI com-
munity to move beyond embarrassment of female sexual body parts 
and instead leverage technologies and systems with the potential 
to improve women’s intimate health [7]. Similarly, in 2017 a CHI 
workshop initiated a new debate on how HCI researchers might 
take on issues related to digital women’s health adoption such as 
taboo, power and prejudice [11]. Other research in this area has 
focused on developing and testing a speculative wearable e-textile 
intended to support breast self-awareness [4], exploring the use of a 
design kit that supports body literacy through electronic textiles [7], 
and the design of an augmented system, Labella, that supports in-
timate bodily knowledge and pelvic ftness in women [8]. Work 
in HCI has also explored sexual health and the design of intimate 
technologies for sexual pleasure[12, 13, 22, 61] . 
There is also signifcant focus in HCI on menstrual health, hy-
giene and education [23, 66]. Recent studies have also explored 
novel methods of embedding menstrual tracking data using am-
bient light and color emitting smart mirrors, to start conversa-
tions on the topic [25, 35] and tracking through physical objects 
like PeriodShare, to automatically quantify and share menstrual 
data on social networks [62]. Other work has stressed on a "pe-
riod positive" approach that does not see menstruation as a "prob-
lem" and encourages construction of new knowledge about the 
self [17, 18]. 
Additionally, outside of HCI, research studies in medicine have 
highlighted the impact of religious beliefs on female health [56]. 
In particular, some studies reveal that religious infuences can per-
haps explain disparities in sexual and reproductive health out-
comes [10, 45]. These studies also reveal the infuence religious 
beliefs have on medical decisions such as the use of chemotherapy 
and other life-saving treatments, which may at times confict with 
medical advise. Recent work in medicine has also explored the ways 
physicians can use such information meaningfully to enact better 
care practices [40]. 
Our study builds on this work but explores specifcally the inter-
section between gender, intimate health and religious beliefs. In ourReligion and Women’s Intimate Health: Towards an Inclusive Approach to Healthcare CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
context this is particularly vital as a majority of the work exploring 
women’s healthcare has been based on a secular framework and 
understanding. In contrast we highlight the profound impact reli-
gion has on how women perceive their own bodies and especially 
their own intimate health. 
2.2 Female Intimate Health in the Global South 
Our work in particular builds on work on menstruation and fe-
male health in the Global South. Previous studies working with 
women in India have detailed the taboo and shameful perception 
of menstruation and female intimate health [36, 42, 68]. For ex-
ample, Tuli et al.,[70] discuss menstrual health education in India 
given the challenges of cultural taboos and limiting social norms. 
They reveal existing approaches to adolescent menstrual education 
highlighting a disconnect in terms of who carries the responsibility 
of introducing menstruation related information to adolescents. A 
similar study exploring menstrual education in India [ 67] present 
fndings from deploying Menstrupedia, a digital platform imparting 
menstrual health education. The study reveals that active participa-
tion, catering for self-disclosure and adopting a holistic approach 
are some important aspects to designing for menstrual health in an 
Indian context. More recent work has investigated menstrual immo-
bilities, particularly revealing the challenges menstruating females 
face on the go in urban Delhi (where menstruation is stigmatized) 
with a focus on identifying their safe spaces in this context [68]. 
Most of this body of work focuses on the external; cultural 
taboo’s, lack of education, lack of access to safe spaces. In contrast, 
our work focuses on the internal; Muslim women’s own beliefs and 
perceptions that determine how they understand and see their own 
sexuality and sexual being. There is in fact a very recent growing 
understanding of the centrality of religious belief’s to how Muslim 
women understand their own agency, autonomy and how they 
navigate their constraints [54]. 
While our work is informed by these studies it is distinct and 
unique in the exploration of the intersection between religious be-
liefs and the corresponding impact on female intimate health. This 
intersection has been touched up by recent work that explores the 
link between maternal health and well being and religious practices 
and beliefs in Pakistan [47]. We build on this work and expand on 
the existing knowledge on female intimate health perceptions and 
behaviours in HCI by revealing the deep impact Islamic religious 
beliefs have on body literacy and women’s perceptions of their 
own health not just with respect to menstruation but through the 
three major stages of a woman’s sexual life cycle (menarche, sexual 
activity and child birth and menopause). 
2.3 Current Female Intimate Health 
Applications 
Many free and subscription based mobile applications are available 
in Google Play and App Store, designed to help women taking care 
of their female health and well being. Most of the applications have 
a few common features such as cycle calculation, calendar, next 
period or ovulation prediction etc., while some of the applications 
ofer some unique features like pills reminders, predicting symp-
toms analyzing available data etc. Among the popular applications, 
BioWink has developed Clue Period Tracker [64] which is one of the top-rated apps in the Google Play and App Store. This appli-
cation can track period ovulation and predict next 3 period cycles, 
log, tracks and forecast symptoms fow, moods and forecast upcom-
ing cramps pain and headaches and remind you on your Google 
calendar. Another similar application is Flo Period Tracker ovula-
tion and Pregnancy Tracker [26] which is developed by Flo health 
Incorporation. It has almost similar features as the previous app 
but it addition it can track fertility window and predict the chances 
of conceiving. These applications developed for women’s health 
are generic and have not included cultural or religious adaptation 
of any forms. They do not take into account the cultural, religious 
and stigmatized nature of female intimate health in our contexts 
especially with respect to shared and monitored phone usage [58] . 
In contrast, Period calendar ovulation tracker developed by Sim-
ple Design Limited [65] is the highest-scoring app in Google play 
and has more than a hundred million users and is one of the top 
health and ftness apps in over 43 countries. It covers all the fea-
tures that the apps mentioned above cover as well as reminders 
for contraceptive and ovulation tracking. The biggest advantage of 
this app is users can customize their notifcation and the security 
features. 
We only found one application designed for Muslim women’s 
needs by Mohammed Javed called [37], the Muslimah’s Cycle which 
focuses on a specifc attributes of the Muslim belief system. Unfor-
tunately, the application does not have many features for health 
tracking and monitoring. However, it helps a Muslim user to keep 
track of her missed prayers (Muslim women can not pray or fast 
while menstruating) and fasts during menstruation cycles. This 
allows them to ’make up’ the fasts at a later date. 
Although there are a number of applications developed and freely 
available to help women manage their intimate and sexual health 
care, none are cognizant of the specifc requirements and needs of 
Muslim women. Most of the designs are generalized and aimed at a 
universal ‘womanhood’. In contrast we aim to address the religious 
perceptions of the intimate female body among Muslim women 
of the South Asian region regardless of their social, cultural and 
economical status. 
3 METHODOLOGY 
Our research study focuses on understanding attitudes, perceptions 
and behaviors around intimate and sexual health of Muslim women 
in three Muslim majority countries. We conduct semi-structured 
interviews with forty participants in all three countries 1. All in-
terviews were conducted among Muslim Women who belonged 
to 3 diferent socio-economic status across Bangladesh, Pakistan, 
and Malaysia. All the interviews and sessions were conducted in 
local languages: Bangla, Urdu, Punjabi and Malay by fve female 
researchers. Each discussion was around one to 1 and 1.5 hours 
long. Our discussions followed a semi-structured format and we 
asked the participants open-ended questions about their knowl-
edge on menstruation, sexual health, decision making in the family, 
healthcare-related awareness, pregnancy, menopause, knowledge 
sharing experience, etc. In the following sections, we discuss the 
participant recruitment, data collection and moderation, and re-
search ethics.CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Mustafa et al. 
3.1 Study Design 
Our study focused on understanding the participants knowledge of 
their sexual and intimate health, their perceptions regarding their 
sexual health and their experiences during the three main phases 
of their reproductive lives; menarche, marriage and child bearing 
and menopause. All the studies were performed following a semi-
structured format. We asked open-ended and focused questions to 
the participants. Our empirical study followed a qualitative research 
method and we focused on eliciting stories and experiences of the 
participants rather than any specifc answer. The participants were 
encouraged to talk about their religious beliefs and how they see 
it impacting their intimate health and their experiences of their 
sexual lives. The same protocol for interviews was used in all three 
countries and with all participants. 
3.2 Country Specifc Demographics and Details 
3.2.1 Bangladesh (n = 15). In Bangladesh, our 15 female partici-
pants included undergrad students, University professors or lectur-
ers, school teachers, retired service holders, domestic helping hands, 
and housewives. Focus groups were conducted in Dhaka (capital of 
Bangladesh). Participants were recruited by contacting each group 
through a known contact, such as through members of the research 
team, university staf, and referrals of other participants. Focus 
groups were conducted in Bengali, thorough notes were taken, and 
later transcribed to English. The research process was explained 
to the participants prior to the interview and participants from 
Bangladesh did not feel comfortable with being audio recorded. 
Instead extensive notes were taken and shown to the participants 
once they were fnalized. Notebooks, pens, pencils, etc. stationary 
were gifted to each participant; Also, snacks were served during 
each session as incentives. 
3.2.2 Pakistan (n = 14). In Pakistan, our 14 female participants 
included students, expecting women, health workers, and gym 
trainers. Interviews were conducted in Lahore, an urban city in the 
province of Punjab. Interviews were conducted in Urdu and Punjabi 
but two female researchers. Each session was audio-recorded after 
seeking verbal informed consent from all participants and was 
transcribed by the researchers to English. 
3.2.3 Malaysia (n = 11). In Malaysia, our 11 female participants 
included executive, technical professional, lecturer, property agent, 
public ofcer, pharmacist, housewife, clerk, and doctor. Semi-structured 
interviews were conducted in environments where participants 
could contribute comfortably. Interviews were conducted in Malay 
and audio recorded with verbal consent from the participants before 
the study. Later, they were transcribed to English by the researchers. 
3.3 Participant Recruitment 
Participants were recruited through known circles of the authors 
using snowball and random sampling. The purpose of the study, 
participant’s privacy and other information behind the research 
were explained to each participant before the sessions. Informed 
consent was obtained verbally from all participants, all interviewers 
were women, Muslim and sensitised to the context of the study. Par-
ticipants were not pushed to share information or experiences they 
were uncomfortable discussing. During the recruitment recruiters also focused on the socioeconomic status of the participants to 
ensure the maximum diversity to obtain an unbiased data set. All 
the participants were 18 years and above. 
3.4 Analysis and Coding 
All the studies were done in local/ native languages and later care-
fully transcribed into English. The transcripts were coded and ana-
lyzed using a thematic analysis pattern. We open coded the data 
both manually and using Nvivo. During open coding initially, in-
dependent codes were generated, and later they were grouped 
under 8 higher-order coding. Finally, 4 major themes were gen-
erated, discussed in the subsection under the fndings. All codes 
were frst generated independently, by independent researchers 
in Bangladesh and Pakistan and then refned and combined. We 
subjected our data to thematic analysis and conducted discussion 
sessions to identify common codes and kept iterating accordingly. 
Unique names were assigned to the codes that were identifed by 
both researchers but had diferent names. Once research teams from 
both countries had agreed upon a standard coding framework, we 
started coding all the transcripts using the agreed upon framework. 
It is also important to highlight here that we attributed certain 
practices and ideas to religious beliefs when they were mentioned 
in reference to God, religious texts, or religious teachings. We did 
not make our own value judgments on what was cultural practice 
or what was religious practice. These distinctions were determined 
by how our participants framed their beliefs and practices. 
3.5 Research Ethics 
All the participants were adults and gave verbal and written consent 
to participate in the study. Our strategies, policies, and permissions 
were discussed verbally with the participants before starting the 
discussion for transparency. We also responded to all the questions 
that were asked by the participants. It was mentioned that partici-
pants had the right to skip any questions or to stop the discussions 
at any point if they are not comfortable with the environment with-
out forfeiting the incentives. All our collected recordings, notes, 
and data are secured and stored in a private drive with full access 
to the researchers only. IRB was obtained for all three sites. 
3.6 Study Context 
Pakistan is a culturally diverse country with a population of 212.2 
million and a literacy rate of 59.13%. Pakistan also scores 149 out 
of a total of 153 countries on the Health and Survival index of the 
WEF Global Gender Gap report [27]. 
Bangladesh is a country of 160 Million people where majority 
of the population is Muslim [72]. The developing country has had 
female leadership since 1990, prioritizing gender issues in its core 
values and practices. There are eforts on female education showing 
minimal gender gap in primary level education which widens up 
towards secondary and tertiary level education. The country being 
part of South Asian region is infuenced by patriarchal practices 
which impacts important issues such as women’s health, particu-
larly intimate health. Bangladesh scores 119 out of a total of 153 
countries on the Health and Survival index of the WEF Global 
Gender Gap report [27].Religion and Women’s Intimate Health: Towards an Inclusive Approach to Healthcare CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
Country N Socio-Economic Status Age Range Marital Status Education 
Bangladesh 15 High-Income(5) 18-30(7) Married(10) High School or Less(4) 
Mid-Income(6) 31-50(4) Unmarried(4) Graduate(4) 
Low-Income(4) >50(4) Widowed(1) Postgraduate or Higher(7) 
Pakistan 14 Mid-Income(4) 18-30(10) Married(8) High School or Less (10) 
Low-Income(10) 31-50(2) Unmarried(6) Graduate(4) 
>50(2) 
Malaysia 11 High-Income(6) 18-30(2) Married(9) High School or Less(1) 
Mid-Income(4) 31-50(8) Unmarried(1) Graduate(7) 
Low-Income(1) >50(1) Divorced(1) Postgraduate or Higher(3) 
Table 1: Country specifc Demographics and Details. 
Malaysia is a country with a population of 31.53 million and 
a literacy rate of 94.85%. Malaysia scores 84 out of a total of 153 
countries on the Health and Survival index of the WEF Global 
Gender Gap report [27]. 
Due to the sensitive nature of the topics of this study, in all 
three contexts encouraging women to share was challenging. This 
is why for most of our interviews we chose to approach women 
we knew or were referred to us by friends and relatives. This is 
particularly true for older women (menopause) who were more 
closed, conservative and uncomfortable with sharing. 
Given that this particular study focuses on exploring religious 
beliefs and perceptions and intimate health, we chose to interview 
women across all age groups and across diverse socio-economic 
backgrounds. We wanted to understand if the perceptions of Is-
lamic beliefs and health varied across educations or socio-economic 
strata’s. Our study reveals similarities in how and which religious 
values and beliefs impact health across all three countries and all 
socio-economic backgrounds. 
All three countries are Muslim majority but as can be seen from 
the literacy rates and the gender gap all three are not uniform in 
the access to health care that women have. While we recognize that 
Islam is not a monolithic religion and has many diferent variations 
and is adopted diferently by diferent peoples, we also posit that 
there are some core beliefs and values that are central to all Muslims 
globally. Our interviews also reveal the similar core values that 
shape Muslim women’s perceptions of their own bodies and health. 
3.7 Self-Disclosure 
The positionality of researchers conducting qualitative or ethno-
graphic work is important in understanding the work, knowing 
who the authors are helps readers situate the analysis and critique. 
Ruth Frankenberg argues that it is even more vital when turning 
the ethnographic lens on contemporary religious practices [28]. 
All authors for this work are Muslim and fve out of six authors 
identify as female and one as male. The authors are of Pakistani, 
Bangladeshi and Malay origin and have conducted feldwork across 
Pakistan, Bangladesh and Malaysia respectively. While all the fe-
male authors belong to diferent countries this study was motivated 
by our shared experience of our own intimate health as Muslim 
women, which resonated across cultures and languages. This shared 
experience based on our own beliefs was the driving force behind this study and our realization as HCI researchers of the lack of repre-
sentation of the Muslim women’s experiences within HCI literature 
and design, particularly with respect to sexual health. The male 
author provided an unbiased perspective and was largely unaware 
of what the interviews revealed despite having lived in Pakistan for 
the majority of his life. This lack of representation of the Muslim 
perceptions and beliefs towards sexual and intimate health led us 
to explore the common Islamic belief’s that impact female sexual 
health in Muslim majority countries and identify opportunities 
where technology might be used to leverage and encompass these 
beliefs to foster communication, provide more appropriate sources 
of information but also better suited technological interventions 
for female sexual health. 
4 FINDINGS 
In all three contexts where this study took place, Islamic beliefs form 
a central theme to how female intimate and reproductive health is 
perceived, how it is managed, and the specifc types of informational 
resources available to women. Our data reveals that these belief 
systems have a direct impact on how women see their bodies, their 
own reproductive and sexual health, and, more importantly, how 
the emphasis that is placed on fulflling their individual intimate 
health needs. We organize our fndings into four sections below. 
First, we discuss ‘Purdah’ (Table.2) as a vital Islamic belief that 
profoundly impacts women’s sexual and reproductive health as 
revealed by our data. We then explore the three main reproductive 
phases in a woman’s life; Menarche, Marriage, and sexual activity, 
and fnally, Menopause. We explore menarche, and the coming of 
age of young girls in Muslim contexts and reveal how concepts of 
sharam or shame (Table. 2) and ‘Purdah’ dictate intimate female 
health in Muslim communities, including the type of information 
given to young girls at the time of menarche. We then unpack the 
impact of these Islamic beliefs as practiced in these three diferent 
Muslim majority countries on sexual and reproductive health after 
marriage, including birth control and contraceptive use. We also 
reveal the understanding and behaviors of Menopause amongst 
older Muslim women and how their Islamic beliefs determine their 
perceptions of their reproductive cycles. In all three sections, we 
explore the causes and types of stigma associated with female sexual 
health at each stage of a Muslim woman’s reproductive cycle. We 
start by explaining some of the beliefs common to all three stages 
of a woman’s reproductive cycle.CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Mustafa et al. 
Religious Words Meaning 
Purdah 
Hijab Amaanah Sharam Salah Sehri Iftari Wadu Hadis/Hadith 
Dua 
Izzat Covering of either the head, face, or whole body Covering the head only Loan, frequently referred to in reference to a loan from God Shame, or modesty Prayer Early morning meal during fasting in the month of Ramadan Evening meal at the end of the daily fast in the month of Ramadan Ablution before praying Records of the traditions or sayings of the Prophet Muhammad, revered as a major source of religious law and moral guidance, second only to the authority of the Quran Prayer honour, reputation, or prestige 
Table 2: Meaning of Religious Words Used 
4.1 Purdah and ‘Haya’ 
Purdah refers to a ‘curtain’ or a covering [53] (Table2). The concept 
in Muslim communities is almost exclusively linked to women’s 
bodies and protecting them from immodest eyes and men’s gaze [59]. 
The idea of Purdah is deeply intertwined with how women see 
their sexual organs and the need to always maintain Purdah, even 
amongst other women. Although the term refers to a physical cov-
ering, it also implies a covering in terms of the language used when 
speaking about women’s sexual health and bodies, and thinking 
about women and their bodies [52]. Similarly, ‘haya’, which loosely 
relates to abashment or honor, is understood as a natural or inher-
ent, shyness, and a sense of modesty [14]. In Islamic terminology, 
it is mainly used in the context of modesty [16]. Haya encourages 
Muslims to avoid anything considered distasteful or abominable 
and plays an essential role in Islam, as it is one of the most im-
portant parts of Iman or faith [14]. Both these concepts of Haya 
and Purdah largely determine behaviors and perceptions around 
Muslim women’s intimate health. 
4.2 Menarche 
In all three contexts, female intimate and sexual health was per-
ceived as a shameful topic, something that needed to be spoken 
of only amongst other women and using indirect language. This 
stems from the belief in Haya where a woman’s body and it’s sexual 
functioning is not discussed. There is no sex education in schools, 
and mothers do not educate daughters on their sexual and repro-
ductive health even when menarche is reached. One participant 
from Malaysia (Table. 5) explained: 
One day, when I was on my way to my mum’s home-
town in Taiping, I had a leak in the car and my mum 
immediately told me that I was fnally becoming a 
‘woman’, and the blood that came out was my ‘period’ 
and I needed to start to cover up and dress more mod-
estly. My knowledge on menstruation was still limited 
... never discussed it in detail with me and I had to learn 
about it all on my own...menstruation is considered taboo and sensitive but this could be changed with the 
implementation of sex education in schools .[PM1] 
While earlier work has discussed the sharing of information 
regarding menstruation, especially within the Indian context [67, 
69, 70], none have explored the basis of intimate and sexual health 
behaviours in Muslim communities where Islamic beliefs of Haya 
and Purdah play a vital role in what information is discussed with 
young girls at the time of menarche. So while [70] reveal that 
information provided to young girls in India is mostly given by their 
mother’s but without the linking of the female sexual form with 
modesty and Islamic beliefs of ’Purdah’. Similarly, unlike the studies 
conducted in India, where a large percentage of the knowledge and 
information is learned through online sources, in our context, the 
internet was not leveraged as a source of information. Across all 
three countries only 4 out of 40 participants (10%) reported using 
the internet to learn about menstruation. 
The learning practices around Purdah and Haya start at an early 
age at home and are deeply interlinked with young girls’ repro-
ductive and sexual bodies. Menstruation for Muslim women is far 
more than a physical change. It represents the growth of a young 
girl into a responsible human being in the community. This means 
she is now responsible for her own actions particularly in terms of 
bearing the consequences of her good and bad deeds in relation to 
her standing with God. This was explained by a participant from 
Malaysia (Table. 5): 
As a Muslim, we were told that you start to be account-
able for your own sins and wrongdoing when menstru-
ation begins, so when it started for me, I thought, after 
this I will be carrying my own sins. That was another 
reason why I cried straight away. [PM10] 
And so unlike the experiences of women in other contexts of 
menstruation (e.g. India), our participants reveal that for them it is 
also a time of great shift in their relationship with their faith and 
their community. 
Our participants also reveal the conscious efort made to hide 
their sexual function particularly with respect to religious duties 
and practices. During menstruation, Muslim women do not needReligion and Women’s Intimate Health: Towards an Inclusive Approach to Healthcare CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
to fast during the fasting month of Ramadan or pray. However, 
almost all women we spoke to in all three countries revealed faking 
prayers and fasting to hide the fact that they were menstruating. 
As one mother in Pakistan explained (Table. 4): 
In Ramzan she eats ’sehri’ (early morning meal) at the 
time of ’sehri’ and ’iftari’(meal at the end of fast) at 
the time of ’iftari’. On prayer time in morning I ask 
her to sit near me while I’m ofering prayer. So that her 
father thinks that she is also ofering prayer. We also 
used to do that in our times. We used to stand in front 
of our father or brother after ’wadu’ (ablution before 
praying). [PP1] 
Another participant also revealed (Table. 4): 
Yes, I feel irritated when I have to pretend having a fast 
in front my brothers and father. [PP7] 
These experiences of our participants highlight the extreme im-
portance of Purdah and women’s sexual health in these communi-
ties. This is also one reason why, unlike India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, 
and Malaysia do not have sexual education in schools or government-
run programs for adolescents like Kishori Shakti Yojana (KSY) and 
SAATHIYA [70]. This has left young women in Muslim countries 
with few sources of guidance and information, and these sources 
tend to be very close female relatives. Additionally, these sources of 
information are not secular in nature, and all information is linked 
with religious beliefs and how they impact the changing bodies of 
young women. 
4.3 Marriage/Child Bearing 
Most of the women in our sample across all three countries had little 
to no knowledge involving sex before marriage. One participant 
from Pakistan explained (Table. 4): 
I never spoke to anybody about that. I only spoke to 
my husband after we got married. I did speak to some 
of other married women who are my friends after we 
got married. [PM3] 
This participant emphasized that she was only able to talk more 
openly about sex and her sexual health after she was married. This 
is a recurring theme with most of our participants who felt more 
comfortable talking about their intimate health after marriage. One 
reason for it can perhaps be derived from the following quote by a 
participant when speaking about delayed periods (Table. 4): 
Yes it happened and I got tensed and really scared be-
cause we are being told that a woman’s dignity depends 
upon her periods. So if you are an honorable women 
and periods stopped then what did you do?...But if you 
are unmarried and tell them you are well passed your 
date then you cannot tell anyone out of fear what will 
they think about me. That why aren’t you having date, 
what is the problem. So I don’t think that me or people 
like me could tell anyone before getting married that 
why aren’t we having period on due date. [PP10] 
Because a woman’s sexual and reproductive body is linked with 
the concept of honor and Haya, unmarried women have to be very 
careful in how they operate in their communities, who they speak 
to regarding their intimate health and the sources of information they have access to. Once married these women experience more 
freedom because of the concept of their husband’s providing Purdah 
or protection for them. Marriage is encouraged in Islam, and is 
seen as the ‘completion’ of every human being as well as an act 
that protects modesty [14]. This is refected in the experiences 
of married Muslim women regarding contraceptive use and birth 
spacing (Table. 3): 
We both (husband and wife) discussed it together. Planned 
pregnancy or planned not to have children. [PB13] 
With regards to contraceptive use, there was a distinct difer-
ence in the views expressed by our Malaysian participants versus 
participants from Bangladesh and Pakistan. Malaysian participants 
were open about intimate health and had a culture of sharing more 
among family members and friends regardless of their gender. These 
fndings from Malaysia also contradict earlier studies amongst Mus-
lim women in Pakistan where women reported I will go for natural 
birth spacing after two sons but will not go for ligation because it’s a 
sin. I have heard that all our prayers go in vain after ligation. [47]. 
Our participants also reveal the essential role their religious 
beliefs play in how they view marital intimacy. For example, one 
participant explained (Table. 3): 
On the religious side, it was said many times about 
foreplay. Accepted Hadis(authenticated religious teach-
ings), foreplay ... anything goes, there is no restriction. 
It’s a mutual thing, its fun thing. But cultural myth 
says only the guys enjoy it. So I could talk to X(husband 
name) about it. Religion was correct. [PB12] 
Similarly, another woman also emphasised the importance of a 
woman’s need for fulflment (Table. 3): 
It requires female partner to get aroused, male partner 
has to wait and learn. No one talks about men making 
women happy- they take credit in wrong places. Reli-
gion talks about partner, asks about making partner 
happy. There is a weak hadith(authenticated religious 
teaching), if you are happy after physical intimacy - if 
a female partner makes dua(prayer), it is very precious. 
But it shows a reward to show how important it is to 
make her happy. [PB14] 
4.4 Menopause 
Our interviews revealed little knowledge amongst our participants 
on menopause. Before experiencing it, most women who had heard 
about menopause had seen their mothers struggling with hot fashes 
and mood swings. However, there is little scientifc knowledge 
amongst the women regarding the efects of menopause (Table. 4): 
I felt that knee’s pain is the frst thing that happen after 
the periods are fnished. Vision of eyes is also gets ef-
fected. Some women also have diabetes after it. I cannot 
say it with guarantee but it’s only in my mind. When I 
visited hospital they performed my medical tests and 
asked me to admit for the operation of eyes. I wasn’t 
able to admit at that time because I knew that it will 
disturb my house’s whole system. Doctor then asked me 
to control diabetes. [PP3]CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Mustafa et al. 
Bangladesh 
Profession Education Economic Status Age Marital Status 
PB1 
PB2 PB3 PB4 PB5 PB6 PB7 PB8 PB9 PB10 PB11 PB12 PB13 PB14 PB15 Domestic Maid Domestic Maid Part-time Maid Part-time Maid School Teacher School Teacher School Teacher Freelancer Student Student Student Associate Professor Lecturer Lecturer Retired No Background No Background Primary School No Background Masters Masters Masters Bachelor’s Bachelor’s Bachelor’s Bachelor’s PhD Masters Masters Masters Low- Income Low- Income Low- Income Low- Income High- Income Mid- Income Mid- Income Mid- Income High- Income Mid- Income Mid- Income High- Income High- Income High- Income Mid- Income 38 45 25 28 52 55 58 20 20 18 19 35 37 31 61 Married Widowed Married Married Married Married Married Unmarried Unmarried Unmarried Unmarried Married Married Married Married 
Table 3: Bangladesh- Participants Details 
Pakistan 
Profession Education Economic Status Age Marital Status 
PP1 PP2 PP3 PP4 PP5 PP6 PP7 PP8 PP9 PP10 PP11 PP12 PP13 PP14 Health Worker Health Worker Health Worker Student Student Student Student Student Gym Trainer Gym Janitor Housewife Housewife Housewife Housewife Middle School Intermediate Matriculation Bachelor’s Intermediate Masters Intermediate Bachelor’s Bachelor’s Primary School Primary School Primary School Middle School Middle School Low- Income Low- Income Low- Income Middle- Income Middle- Income Low- Income Low- Income Middle- Income Middle- Income Low- Income Low- Income Low- Income Low- Income Low- Income 50+ Married 
45 Married 
50+ Married 
24 Unmarried 
23 Unmarried 
21 Unmarried 
18 Unmarried 
19 Unmarried 
30 Unmarried 
33 Married 
23 Married 
20 Married 
24 Married 
19 Married 
Table 4: Pakistan- Participants Details 
Malaysia 
Profession Education Economic Status Age Marital Status 
PM1 Executive Bachelor’s Mid- Income 39 Unmarried 
PM2 Technical Professional Bachelor’s Mid- Income 44 Divorced 
PM3 Lecturer PhD High- Income 38 Married 
PM4 Lecturer PhD High- Income 45 Married 
PM5 Property agent Bachelor’s High- Income 40 Married 
PM6 Public ofcer Bachelor’s Mid- Income 40 Married 
PM7 Pharmacist Bachelor’s High- Income 40 Married 
PM8 Housewife Bachelor’s Mid- Income 40 Married 
PM9 Lecturer PhD High- Income 41 Married 
PM10 Clerk High School Low- Income 34 Married 
PM11 Doctor Bachelor’s High- Income 36 Married 
Table 5: Malaysia- Participants DetailsReligion and Women’s Intimate Health: Towards an Inclusive Approach to Healthcare CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
Since most of our participants who had already experience menopause 
were over 50 years of age, they had no sources of information re-
garding menopause. Some reported going to the hospital, but most 
did not seek out medical advice or help. Few reported hearing 
about it from friends who have experienced it or have seen elderly 
family members. Some younger participants shared about their 
mother’s experiences about external suferings without knowing 
much about the detail of it. They also had limited interactions with 
technology and do not seek out online sources for information or 
support. For women in this age bracket in our context, the only 
source of information is close friends who are experiencing similar 
menopause symptoms. This leads to certain myths and taboos be-
ing propagated within the community as also revealed by Tuli et 
al. [70]. This lack of knowledge and understanding of menopausal 
symptoms can have severe long term impacts on women’s health 
and well being especially since menopausal symptoms are more 
that just ’mood swings’ or ’hot fashes’ including symptoms like 
vasomotor symptoms, sleep disturbances, depression, urinary tract 
infection, vaginal atrophy and increased health risks for osteoporo-
sis, cardiovascular diseases and loss of cognitive function. All our 
participants across all three context’s were unaware of the impor-
tance of seeking therapies for menopause and of the adverse impact 
on mental and physical health as a consequence. 
Women we interviewed in Bangladesh were extremely uncom-
fortable in talking about menopause. This came as a surprise to 
the interviewing author as these were educated, modern literate 
and fnancially well of women. These women were comfortable 
talking about menstruation but hesitant to talk about or discuss 
menopause. They were also uncomfortable discussing contracep-
tives and decision making regarding having children. 
5 DISCUSSION 
Designing for intimate and sexual health for women is a vital but 
challenging task which is further complicated for communities that 
follow belief systems traditionally less well-understood within HCI. 
Rossmann in her work argues that the female body has historically 
been a subject of taboo which has deeply impacted the develop-
ment of women’s health in general and the speculum as a tool in 
particular [57]. This is also true particularly for women’s health in 
Muslim communities and the adoption or lack of adoption of tech-
nologies targeted towards improving their health outcomes, simply 
because technologies while culturally sensitive are not tuned into 
the internal belief systems of these populations which our study 
reveals have a deep impact on how these women view their own 
sexual and intimate health. Almeida et al. [6] highlight access, qual-
ity of care available, as well as the positioning of women and their 
bodies within society as key issues afecting women’s health. Our 
study reveals the impact the Islamic faith and practices have on 
access, quality of care and in particular the way women’s bodies 
are perceived and positioned within Muslim societies. 
Having understood the belief systems that impact female sexual 
health in Muslim communities we now discuss socio-technical im-
plications for designing interventions that target improved women’s 
healthcare and the potential for HCI to positively improve the op-
tions and experiences available to women within these communities. We will also discuss the challenges in designing for inclusion of 
religious practices and beliefs for women’s intimate healthcare. 
5.1 Body Literacy, Religious Attitudes and 
Impact on Health 
As revealed by our study there is a deep connect between belief in 
Purdah and Haya and how women see and perceive their own bod-
ies and particularly how they discuss and seek knowledge regarding 
their own sexual and reproductive health. This connect between 
a woman’s Islamic faith and the resulting impact on her maternal 
health has also been explored by Mustafa et al. [47] who reveal 
specifc spiritual practices for healing and well-being amongst Mus-
lim women for pregnancy related issues. A Muslim woman’s body 
except for her hands and face are considered in the Islamic faith 
as ’awrah’ meaning ’that which should be covered’ [9]. Given this 
emphasis on covering, protecting and hiding the female body and 
its sexual functioning coupled with the lack of sex education in 
schools, women have little understanding of their own intimate 
and sexual bodies and self. Additionally, given how the understand-
ing of Purdah extends to the language and words that are used 
to discuss sexual and reproductive functioning there is little ex-
plicit sharing and transferring of knowledge of the body within 
the community which might help in extending a women’s own 
understanding of her sexual and reproductive body. The problem 
is exacerbated by the lack of incorporation of the concepts of ’Pur-
dah’ or ’Haya’ in how information is presented to women in online 
sources of information. Previous studies on understanding women’s 
intimate health have emphasised the importance of body literacy 
to support timely preventive care practices on the body i.e. having 
knowledge of and knowing how to care for one’s own intimate 
anatomy can potentially safeguard future health [6]. In contrast to 
knowing and body literacy we reveal the emphasis on ’covering’ 
and hiding as linked to female sexuality in Muslim communities. 
Wray et al. [73] in their exploration of the sexual health of young 
unmarried, heterosexual Muslim women in Australia also reveal 
‘purity versus corruption’ as the primary construction of women’s 
sexuality. A similar study exploring Muslim women’s intention 
and uptake of mammography found that across a diverse ethnic-
ity religious beliefs infuence decisions to pursue mammography 
across the ethnic/racial diversity of Muslim women [ 51]. This par-
ticular study was conducted with ffty Muslim American women, 
with near-equal numbers of African American, South Asian, and 
Arab Muslims who were recruited through mosques. Our study 
and fndings join this small body of work that explores and reveals 
the deep link between Muslim women’s religious beliefs and their 
perception and engagement with their own bodies and intimate 
health across countries and ethnicity’s. As revealed by studies from 
the feld of medicine [33, 60] these attitudes towards their own 
sexual and reproductive health have long term negative impacts on 
the health and well-being of Muslim women. 
5.2 Leveraging Religious Beliefs for Intimate Health 
Our study reveals the importance and emphasis placed on Islamic 
beliefs amongst women in all three countries. Any female health 
intervention targeted towards improving health outcomes amongstCHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Mustafa et al. 
Muslim women must then include and leverage the beliefs of these 
women. We reveal religion as an important framework through 
which women in our sample attach value and meaning to health and 
health behaviors. Studies on persuasive technologies for motivat-
ing health behaviours focus on tracking, audio and video feedback, 
social support, motivational messages and positive reinforcement 
as some strategies for behaviour change [31, 49]. However, these 
strategies are targeted towards a general and often secular western 
audience and do not leverage the opportunity to design for and 
include inherent belief systems for motivating behavior change.The 
primary source of habits and life choices for many people globally 
are rooted in religious and spiritual motivations [24], especially 
in communities where religion is still a controlling force not just 
in everyday social life but also health practices [47, 63]. Recent 
studies in HCI and have revealed how modern assumptions break 
down when applied to a context where diferent moral and spir-
itual frameworks operate. For instance, Mustafa et al.’s study of 
spiritual practices and maternal health reveal the tensions between 
western medicine and faith-based practices and the predominance 
of spiritual practices over western medicine [47]. 
Within the Muslim context, leveraging the emphasis placed on 
personal health and well-being in Islam to encourage women to-
wards body literacy and actively engaging with their own sexual 
bodies and health has the potential for greater engagement and 
adoption of technology interventions amongst Muslim communi-
ties. According to Islamic beliefs the body is an ’amanah’, a loan, 
given to you from God that must be protected, cherished and taken 
care of. Islam views Muslims as caretakers and safe-keepers of their 
physical and spiritual existence, each of which is prone to disease 
and harm. Among the duties of Muslims is to protect themselves 
from harm and actively seek a cure for all ailments [3]. It is vital 
that HCI research engages with these beliefs for persuading women 
to not only be more engaged with their own sexual health, seek 
help more frequently and openly but also to feel more empowered 
by doing so and breaking the cycles of myth, secrecy and taboo that 
currently pervades anything linked to women’s sexual identities. 
As one participant put it: 
If we look at early documents and scripture - I won 
an inter-religion contest where I could answer queries 
about all religion. Judaism is a bit open. All scripture 
has taboo... but Quran is very open about it. Sexual 
activity was seen as an activity to produce children. In 
Islam - it is not to produce children. Many widows used 
to remarry - they had a focus to have sexual activity -
not to get produce. It was more for sexual pleasure. It is 
from History. It is for pleasure. [PB12] 
This approach to leveraging religious practices and institutions 
as a way to achieve positive social change and motivate behavior 
has rarely been explored within HCI. However, it has been ex-
plored in the feld of medicine, where a study aimed at decreasing 
cancer mortality amongst Muslim women in the US conducted a 
religiously tailored, mosque-based, peer-led group education in-
tervention which involved facilitated discussions and expert-led 
didactics to convey health-related religious teachings, and informa-
tion about the benefts and process of mammography. The study re-
ported a demonstrated efectiveness in improving Muslim women’s self-reported likelihood of obtaining mammograms, and increased 
their mammography utilization, with 40% obtaining a mammogram 
within 12 months of the intervention [50]. The uptake and increase 
in adoption of mammography was a result of leveraging the re-
ligious belief’s of the target population and persuasive teaching 
based on Islamic religious texts, in particular the emphasis in Islam 
on duty to God and the stewardship of one’s body as it is considered 
a loan (amanah ) and a trust from God [3]. This understanding of 
the importance of religious beliefs in determining health outcomes, 
especially for Muslim women is missing from HCI research, par-
ticularly in terms of designing health related interventions and 
designing to increase body literacy and motivate behaviour change. 
We believe the inclusion of diverse and faith based value systems 
will beneft research on women’s health and well-being by provid-
ing strategies that appeal to women’s core belief systems. 
We suggest two ways to think about engaging with religious 
beliefs for motivating behaviour change which we elaborate on 
below. 
5.2.1 Re-framing of Secular goals. Framing secular goals with re-
spect to better intimate health within a religious world-view and 
values. So for example, instead of appealing to the importance of 
regular self-examinations for breast cancer for better health, instead 
reminders for self-checks linked with God’s command to take care 
of the physical body. Similarly, instead of appealing to liberal west-
ern ideologies for a shift in attitudes towards sex and sexuality in 
Muslim communities where these topics are considered taboo [74], 
it might be more fruitful to appeal to the Quranic and religious 
text’s that highlight the importance of a full sexual life for men and 
women both. There are a signifcant number of hadith emphasising 
the importance of a woman’s pleasure and that of love-making with 
one’s mate as both pleasant and religiously meritorious [71]. 
5.2.2 Hierarchy of Beliefs. Contextualizing and prioritizing beliefs 
that hinder better intimate health with religious commandments 
that might take precedence. So for example there are strict guide-
lines in the Quran and in Hadith about preserving one’s good health. 
In fact scholars believe that if one allows oneself to be in a state 
which may/would cause diferent problems to come upon them, 
and no action is actively taken to preserve good health, then it 
means you are contributing to the destruction of your own health 
which is Haraam (unlawful) in Islam [29]. In Islam, faith is incor-
porated directly into the healing process and, since each person is 
considered a unique creation, each is held responsible under God 
for personal health achievements [71]. This very strong command 
to preserve one’s well-being can be leveraged to supersede the 
modesty and shyness that Muslim women feel in engaging with 
their own intimate bodies. 
The two ways we present above to engage with religious beliefs 
are distinct from each other and allow us diferent possibilities for 
thinking about design. For example, it is recommended that women 
get a mammogram every year and that they be familiar with how 
their breasts look and feel. This is a secular goal which as such is 
less meaningful for Muslim women as opposed to framing it by 
emphasizing the strict religious obligation to maintain one’s health. 
Similarly, often there is a perceived confict between secular goals 
and Islamic values - like exposing oneself to a breast exam (even 
if it is a self-exam) (violating Purdah/modesty by touching one’sReligion and Women’s Intimate Health: Towards an Inclusive Approach to Healthcare CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
intimate self) versus the religious beliefs of preserving one’s health. 
In this case it is important to contextualize the belief in purdah with 
a higher belief in maintaining one’s health even if it means seeing 
a male doctor (if only a male doctor is available, it is permissible). 
Similarly, applications that teach self-examination for breast exams 
could potentially also include specifcs on how Purdah does not 
apply in this case supported by religious texts (Hierarchy of Beliefs). 
5.3 Diversity in Belief Systems 
Religions are not monolithic in nature and there is substantial di-
versity of thought among individuals and communities within a 
religion (for example Shia and Sunni sects within Islam), and re-
ligious doctrines often adopt multiple interpretations of religious 
texts. In our sample we did not specifcally ask for religious denom-
ination within Islam, as we did not want to create any friction and 
wanted to focus on learning about intimate health belief’s and prac-
tices. However, we can imagine diferences and similarities amongst 
how Islam is practiced with respect to the intimate body and any 
technology design incorporating religious knowledge would need 
to be based on an intimate understanding of these diferences and 
similarities. One obvious way to help identify which beliefs and 
values to leverage is to work with religious fgures and community 
members within each community. These types of collaborations 
can be particularly useful in identifying core beliefs and values that 
would appeal to a broad base of Muslims but also present a unique 
opportunity to leverage the design space to encourage learning 
across these groups. 
5.4 Design Implication 
A high level view from a designer’s perspective can provide insights 
that refect the core values and practices shared by our participants. 
In this section we briefy explore how these values might translate 
into potential design implications. It must be emphasized that the 
design space can be perceived in diferent ways based on subjective 
representation. 
Purdah: The concept of purdah is discussed throughout our 
work, it is an integral part of the lifestyle of our participant Muslim 
women. Our interviews reveal younger women tend to seek out 
information online more than older women but in general there was 
a reluctance to search for such information due to its explicit nature. 
Purdah in a design space can be interpreted into distinct design 
elements. Firstly, along the lines of keeping women’s information 
and access’ private during the process of technology design. For 
example, one way might be to use blurred/pixelated images of 
intimate body parts when teaching body literacy. Secondly, the 
design must consider that women in the Global South often lack 
physical personal space in their homes as opposed to women in 
the Global North [46]. This means any design incorporating the 
ideals of Purdah must navigate privacy concerns with respect to 
not just the digital space but also the physical space. Technologies 
would then need to ensure personal information be accessible when 
physical privacy and comfort level can be achieved. One way to 
achieve this might be to consider using covered images that can be 
uncovered as and when user’s feel comfortable (and have physical 
privacy) instead of directly making images visible on an app/website 
the moment it is accessed. Perhaps, also to pixelate on a spectrum based on how comfortable user’s are and how much detail they 
require. 
Knowledge: Islam as a religion emphasizes the seeking of knowl-
edge. This core value is universal and could be a potentially power-
ful element informative design. The design space can emphasize on 
earning adequate knowledge to take proper care of one’s body. So 
for example, apps that remind women to get bi-yearly pap-smears 
or breast exams would motivate behaviour change more meaning-
fully if the reminders were linked with religious knowledge and 
messaging of the importance of taking care of one’s health. This 
is more likely to motivate Muslim women to seek intimate health-
care as opposed to messaging that is secular. These are just some 
examples of how insights into how Muslim women view their own 
sexuality can inform design choices. 
6 CONCLUSION 
Despite the challenges highlighted above, we believe that an ex-
ploration of and design for the intersection of religious beliefs and 
female intimate health could have a signifcant impact on the health 
outcomes of women in Muslim contexts. Our study reveals the po-
tential of alternative approaches to designing for women in Muslim 
contexts that appeal to their core values and belief systems. We 
also outline specifc approaches to incorporating religious beliefs 
in the design of health technologies in non-secular contexts. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Sacha St-Onge Ahmad, Mustafa Naseem, and Agha Ali Raza. 2017. Maternal 
Awareness for Low-Literate Expecting Parents via Voice-Based Telephone Ser-
vices. HCI. 
[2] Samia Al-Amoudi, Jordan Cañas, Sarah D Hohl, Sandra R Distelhorst, and Beti 
Thompson. 2015. Breaking the silence: breast cancer knowledge and beliefs 
among Somali Muslim women in Seattle, Washington. Health care for women 
international 36, 5 (2015), 608–616. 
[3] Radi al-Din Hasan b. Fadl al Tabrisi. 1305. Makarim al-akhlaq. 362 pages. 
[4] Teresa Almeida. 2015. Designing intimate wearables to promote preventative 
health care practices. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint 
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2015 
ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers. 659–662. 
[5] Teresa Almeida, Madeline Balaam, Shaowen Bardzell, and Lone Koefoed Hansen. 
2020. Introduction to the Special Issue on HCI and the Body: Reimagining 
Women’s Health. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 27, 
4 (2020), 1–32. 
[6] Teresa Almeida, Rob Comber, and Madeline Balaam. 2016. HCI and Intimate 
Care as an Agenda for Change in Women’s Health. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2599–2611. 
[7] Teresa Almeida, Rob Comber, Patrick Olivier, and Madeline Balaam. 2014. Inti-
mate care: exploring eTextiles for teaching female pelvic ftness. In Proceedings 
of the 2014 companion publication on Designing interactive systems. 5–8. 
[8] Teresa Almeida, Rob Comber, Gavin Wood, Dean Saraf, and Madeline Balaam. 
2016. On looking at the vagina through Labella. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1810–1821. 
[9] Magda Amer. 2006. An Islamic Perspective on Legislation for Women. Al-Falah 
Foundation. 
[10] Jonna Arousell and Aje Carlbom. 2016. Culture and religious beliefs in relation 
to reproductive health. Best practice & research Clinical obstetrics & gynaecology 
32 (2016), 77–87. 
[11] Madeline Balaam, Lone Koefoed Hansen, Catherine D’Ignazio, Emma Simpson, 
Teresa Almeida, Stacey Kuznetsov, Mike Catt, and Marie LJ Søndergaard. 2017. 
Hacking women’s health. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 476–483. 
[12] Jefrey Bardzell and Shaowen Bardzell. 2011. Pleasure is your birthright: digitally 
enabled designer sex toys as a case of third-wave HCI. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems. 257–266. 
[13] Jeremy Birnholtz, Irina Shklovski, Mark Handel, and Eran Toch. 2015. Let’s talk 
about sex (Apps), CSCW. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference Companion 
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing. 283–288. 
[14] Aisha Wood Boulanouar. 2006. The notion of modesty in Muslim women’s 
clothing: An Islamic point of view. New Zealand Journal of Asian Studies 8, 2CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Mustafa et al. 
(2006), 134. 
[15] Elizabeth Buie and Mark Blythe. 2013. Spirituality: there’s an app for that!(but not 
a lot of research). In CHI’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. 2315–2324. 
[16] M.I. Bukhar ¯ ¯ı. 2002. Al-Adab Al Mufrad. Darul Ishaat. https://books.google.com. 
bd/books?id=wOvXAAAAMAAJ 
[17] Nadia Campo Woytuk, Linette Nilsson, and Mingxing Liu. 2019. Your period 
rules: Design implications for period-positive technologies. In Extended Abstracts 
of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–6. 
[18] Nadia Campo Woytuk, Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard, Marianela Ciolf Felice, 
and Madeline Balaam. 2020. Touching and Being in Touch with the Menstruating 
Body. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. 1–14. 
[19] Joe Devine and Séverine Deneulin. 2011. Negotiating religion in everyday life: A 
critical exploration of the relationship between religion, choices and behaviour. 
Culture and Religion 12, 01 (2011), 59–76. 
[20] Catherine D’Ignazio, Alexis Hope, Becky Michelson, Robyn Churchill, and Ethan 
Zuckerman. 2016. A Feminist HCI Approach to Designing Postpartum Tech-
nologies: " When I frst saw a breast pump I was wondering if it was a joke". In 
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 
2612–2622. 
[21] Anna Eaglin and Shaowen Bardzell. 2011. Sex Toys and Designing for Sexual 
Wellness. In CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CHI EA ’11). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 1837–1842. https://doi.org/10.1145/1979742.1979879 
[22] Anna Eaglin and Shaowen Bardzell. 2011. Sex toys and designing for sexual 
wellness. In CHI’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
1837–1842. 
[23] Daniel A Epstein, Nicole B Lee, Jennifer H Kang, Elena Agapie, Jessica Schroeder, 
Laura R Pina, James Fogarty, Julie A Kientz, and Sean Munson. 2017. Examin-
ing menstrual tracking to inform the design of personal informatics tools. In 
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 
6876–6888. 
[24] Patrick F Fagan. 1996. Why religion matters: the impact of religious practice on 
social stability. Heritage Foundation Backgrounder 1064 (1996), 33. 
[25] Margaret Flemings, Shanzay Kazmi, Rachel Pak, and Orit Shaer. 2018. Crimson 
wave: Shedding light on menstrual health. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Interna-
tional Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction. 343–348. 
[26] fo Health Team. [n.d.]. Flo Period tracker, Ovulation & Pregnancy tracker. 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.iggymedia.periodtracker 
[27] World Economic Forum. 2000. Global Gender Gap Report 2020. (2000). 
[28] Ruth Frankenberg. 2004. Living spirit, living practice: Poetics, politics, epistemology. 
Duke University Press. 
[29] Nazim Ghouri, Mohammed Atcha, and Aziz Sheikh. 2006. Infuence of Islam on 
smoking among Muslims. Bmj 332, 7536 (2006), 291–294. 
[30] Conrad Hackett, Brian Grim, Marcin Stonawski, Vegard Skirbekk, Michaela 
Potančoková, and G Abel. 2012. The global religious landscape. Washington, DC: 
Pew Research Center (2012). 
[31] Sajanee Halko and Julie A Kientz. 2010. Personality and persuasive technology: 
an exploratory study on health-promoting mobile applications. In International 
conference on persuasive technology. Springer, 150–161. 
[32] Jessica Hammer. 2020. Envisioning Jewish HCI. In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–10. 
[33] Memoona Hasnain, Usha Menon, Carol Estwing Ferrans, and Laura Szalacha. 
2014. Breast cancer screening practices among frst-generation immigrant muslim 
women. Journal of Women’s Health 23, 7 (2014), 602–612. 
[34] Susan Hollins. 2005. Spirituality and religion: exploring the relationship. Nursing 
Management (through 2013) 12, 6 (2005), 22. 
[35] Sarah Homewood. 2018. Designing for the changing body: A feminist exploration 
of self-tracking technologies. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–4. 
[36] Minal Jain and Pradeep Yammiyavar. 2015. Game based learning tool seeking 
peer support for empowering adolescent girls in rural Assam. In Proceedings of 
the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children. 275–278. 
[37] Mohammed Javed Jeewa. [n.d.]. The Muslimah’s Cycle. https://play.google.com/ 
store/apps/details?id=com.themuslimahscycle.app 
[38] Gopinaath Kannabiran, Alex A Ahmed, Matthew Wood, Madeline Balaam, 
Joshua G Tanenbaum, Shaowen Bardzell, and Jefrey Bardzell. 2018. Design 
for sexual wellbeing in HCI. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–7. 
[39] Efat Merghati Khoei, Anna Whelan, and Jefrey Cohen. 2008. Sharing beliefs: 
What sexuality means to Muslim Iranian women living in Australia. Culture, 
health & sexuality 10, 3 (2008), 237–248. 
[40] Harold G Koenig et al. 2004. Religion, spirituality, and medicine: research fndings 
and implications for clinical practice. South Med J 97, 12 (2004), 1194–200. 
[41] Neha Kumar and Richard J Anderson. 2015. Mobile phones for maternal health in 
rural India. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems. 427–436. [42] Neha Kumar, Naveena Karusala, Azra Ismail, and Anupriya Tuli. 2020. Taking the 
Long, Holistic, and Intersectional View to Women’s Wellbeing. ACM Transactions 
on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 27, 4 (2020), 1–32. 
[43] Aisha K Lofters, Mandana Vahabi, Eliane Kim, Lisa Ellison, Erin Graves, and 
Richard H Glazier. 2017. Cervical Cancer screening among women from Muslim-
majority countries in Ontario, Canada. Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention 
Biomarkers 26, 10 (2017), 1493–1499. 
[44] Mina Matin and Samuel LeBaron. 2004. Attitudes toward cervical cancer screen-
ing among Muslim women: a pilot study. Women & health 39, 3 (2004), 63–77. 
[45] Christine Metusela, Jane Ussher, Janette Perz, Alexandra Hawkey, Marina Mor-
row, Renu Narchal, Jane Estoesta, and Melissa Monteiro. 2017. “In my culture, 
we don’t know anything about that”: Sexual and reproductive health of migrant 
and refugee women. International journal of behavioral medicine 24, 6 (2017), 
836–845. 
[46] Nusrat Jahan Mim and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. Others’ Images: Online Social 
Media, Architectural Improvisations, and Spatial Marginalization in Bangladesh. 
In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
1–14. 
[47] Maryam Mustafa, Amna Batool, Beenish Fatima, Fareeda Nawaz, Kentaro Toyama, 
and Agha Ali Raza. 2020. Patriarchy, Maternal Health and Spiritual Healing: 
Designing Maternal Health Interventions in Pakistan. In Proceedings of the 2020 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13. 
[48] Maryam Mustafa, Shaimaa Lazem, Ebtisam Alabdulqader, Kentaro Toyama, Shar-
ifa Sultana, Samia Ibtasam, Richard Anderson, and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2020. 
IslamicHCI: Designing with and within Muslim Populations. In Extended Ab-
stracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–8. 
[49] Rita Orji and Karyn Mofatt. 2018. Persuasive technology for health and wellness: 
State-of-the-art and emerging trends. Health informatics journal 24, 1 (2018), 
66–91. 
[50] Aasim I Padela, Sana Malik, Syeda Akila Ally, Michael Quinn, Stephen Hall, and 
Monica Peek. 2018. Reducing muslim mammography disparities: outcomes from 
a religiously tailored mosque-based intervention. Health Education & Behavior 
45, 6 (2018), 1025–1035. 
[51] Aasim I Padela, Milkie Vu, Hadiyah Muhammad, Farha Marfani, Saleha Mallick, 
Monica Peek, and Michael T Quinn. 2016. Religious beliefs and mammography 
intention: fndings from a qualitative study of a diverse group of American 
Muslim women. Psycho-oncology 25, 10 (2016), 1175–1182. 
[52] Hanna Papanek. 1971. Purdah in Pakistan: seclusion and modern occupations 
for women. Journal of Marriage and the Family (1971), 517–530. 
[53] Hanna Papanek. 1973. Purdah: Separate worlds and symbolic shelter. Comparative 
studies in society and history 15, 3 (1973), 289–325. 
[54] Hawra Rabaan, Alyson L Young, and Lynn Dombrowski. 2021. Daughters of 
Men: Saudi Women’s Sociotechnical Agency Practices in Addressing Domestic 
Abuse. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 4, CSCW3 (2021), 
1–31. 
[55] Divya Ramachandran, John Canny, Prabhu Dutta Das, and Edward Cutrell. 2010. 
Mobile-izing health workers in rural India. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference 
on human factors in computing systems. 1889–1898. 
[56] Diaa EE Rizk and Madiha M El-Safty. 2006. Female pelvic foor dysfunction in the 
Middle East: a tale of three factors—culture, religion and socialization of health 
role stereotypes. International Urogynecology Journal 17, 5 (2006), 436–438. 
[57] Jenn Stroud Rossmann. 2008. Built to spec?: The vaginal speculum as a case 
study of inadequate design. 
[58] Nithya Sambasivan, Garen Checkley, Amna Batool, Nova Ahmed, David Nemer, 
Laura Sanely Gaytán-Lugo, Tara Matthews, Sunny Consolvo, and Elizabeth 
Churchill. 2018. " Privacy is not for me, it’s for those rich women": Performative 
Privacy Practices on Mobile Phones by Women in South Asia. In Fourteenth 
Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security ( {SOUPS } 2018). 127–142. 
[59] Anna J Secor. 2002. The veil and urban space in Istanbul: women’s dress, mobility 
and Islamic knowledge. Gender, Place and Culture: A Journal of Feminist Geography 
9, 1 (2002), 5–22. 
[60] MA Shaheen, OM Galal, L Salahi, and Y Aman. 2005. Underutilization of mammog-
raphy among Muslim women in Southern California. In 133rd Annual Meeting 
& Exposition, American Public Health Association. Philadelphia, PA: December. 
10–14. 
[61] Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard. 2017. Intimate Design: Designing Intimacy As 
a Critical-Feminist Practice. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 320–325. 
[62] Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard and Lone Koefoed Hansen. 2016. PeriodShare: 
A bloody design fction. In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction. 1–6. 
[63] Sharifa Sultana and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2019. Witchcraft and hci: Morality, 
modernity, and postcolonial computing in rural bangladesh. In Proceedings of the 
2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–15. 
[64] BioWink Team. [n.d.]. Clue Period Tracker, Ovulation & Cycle Calendar. https: 
//play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.clue.android 
[65] Simple Design Ltd. team. [n.d.]. Period Tracker - Period Calendar Ovula-
tion Tracker. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.popularapp.Religion and Women’s Intimate Health: Towards an Inclusive Approach to Healthcare 
periodcalendar 
[66] Bonnie Tran and Lee Na Choi. 2018. Menstrual maze: A toy exploring public 
engagement in menstrual health education. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–6. 
[67] Anupriya Tuli, Shaan Chopra, Neha Kumar, and Pushpendra Singh. 2018. Learn-
ing from and with Menstrupedia: Towards menstrual health education in India. 
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–20. 
[68] Anupriya Tuli, Shaan Chopra, Pushpendra Singh, and Neha Kumar. 2020. Men-
strual (Im) Mobilities and Safe Spaces. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–15. 
[69] Anupriya Tuli, Shruti Dalvi, Neha Kumar, and Pushpendra Singh. 2019. “It’s a 
Girl Thing”: Examining Challenges and Opportunities around Menstrual Health 
Education in India. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 26, 5, Article 29 (July 
2019), 24 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3325282 CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
[70] Anupriya Tuli, Shruti Dalvi, Neha Kumar, and Pushpendra Singh. 2019. “It’sa 
girl thing” Examining Challenges and Opportunities around Menstrual Health 
Education in India. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 
26, 5 (2019), 1–24. 
[71] Earle H Waugh. 1999. The Islamic Tradition: Religious Beliefs and Health Care 
Decisions. (1999). 
[72] Government Website. 2020. Bangladesh.gov.bd. Retrieved Aug, 2020 from https: 
//bangladesh.gov.bd/index.php 
[73] Anneke Wray, Jane M Ussher, and Janette Perz. 2014. Constructions and experi-
ences of sexual health among young, heterosexual, unmarried Muslim women 
immigrants in Australia. Culture, health & sexuality 16, 1 (2014), 76–89. 
[74] Fouzia Younas, Mustafa Naseem, and Maryam Mustafa. 2020. Patriarchy and 
Social Media: Women Only Facebook Groups as Safe Spaces for Support Seeking 
in Pakistan. In Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Information 
and Communication Technologies and Development. 1–11.