RAGuard: A Hardware Based Mechanism for Backward-Edge
Control-Flow Integrity
Jun Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Computer
Architecture, ICT, CAS
Beijing, China
University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences
zhangjun02@ict.ac.cnRui Hou
Institute of Information
Engineering, CAS
Beijing, China
hourui@iie.ac.cnJunfeng Fan
Open Security Research
Shenzhen, China
fan@opsefy.com
Ke Liu
State Key Laboratory of Computer
Architecture, ICT, CAS
Beijing, China
liuke@ict.ac.cnLixin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Computer
Architecture, ICT, CAS
Beijing, China
zhanglixin@ict.ac.cnSally A. McKee
Computer Science and Engineering,
Chalmers University of Technology
Gothenburg, Sweden
sallyamckee@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Control-ow integrity (CFI) is considered as a general and
promising method to prevent code-reuse attacks, which utilize
benign code sequences to realize arbitrary computation. Cur-
rent approaches can eciently protect control-ow transfers
caused by indirect jumps and function calls (forward-edge
CFI). However, they cannot eectively protect control-ow
caused by the function return (backward-edge CFI). The
reason is that the set of return addresses of the functions
that are frequently called can be very large, which might bend
the backward-edge CFI. We address this backward-edge CFI
problem by proposing a novel hardware-assisted mechanism
(RAGuard) that binds a message authentication code to each
return address and enhances security via a physical unclon-
able function and a hardware hash function. The message
authentication codes can be stored on the program stack with
return address. RAGuard hardware automatically veries
the integrity of return addresses. Our experiments show that
for a subset of the SPEC CPU2006 benchmarks, RAGuard
incurs 1.86% runtime overheads on average with no need for
OS support.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Security and privacy →Hash functions and message
authentication codes; Key management; Embedded sys-
tems security;
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for prot or commercial advantage
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the rst page.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specic permission and/or a fee. Request permissions
from permissions@acm.org.
CF'17, Siena, Italy
©2017 ACM. 978-1-4503-4487-6/17/05. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3075564.3075570KEYWORDS
backward-edge control-ow integrity, return oriented pro-
gramming, return address, message authentication code, phys-
ical unclonable function, hardware hash function
1 INTRODUCTION
Code-reuse attacks, which repurposes existing code to a
malicious end, have been developed to exploit memory cor-
ruption vulnerabilities in modern software. Such attacks
are widespread: they have been reported on x86, ARM, S-
PARC, PowerPC, and Atmel AVR architectures [ 11,23,26].
The simplest code-reuse attack employs a return-into-libc
technique that allows the attacker to execute an arbitrary se-
quence of libc functions via a buer overow that overwrites
the stack with their parameters and return addresses. More
complex approaches eect arbitrary computations by redi-
recting program control ow and chaining small fragments of
benign code (called gadgets ). Return Oriented Programming
(ROP) [ 23] is a typical code-reuse attack, which utilizes gad-
gets ended with a retinstruction to hijack the backward-edge
control-ow1.
Control-ow integrity (CFI) is considered as a general
method to prevent code-reuse attacks. It restricts the control
transfers along the edges of the program's predened Control-
Flow Graph (CFG) [ 1]. CFG is constructed by statically
analyzing the source code or binary of a given program. But
it is possible for static program analysis to over-approximate
the valid target addresses for indirect branches2at runtime,
especially for the return from frequently called function that
might have a large set of valid target addresses [ 4]. Hence,
the return transfer checking might be prone to bend [4] the
backward-edge CFI due to limited context information.
1Forward-edge control-ow represents transfers caused by indirect
jumps and function calls. Backward-edge control-ow represents trans-
fers caused by retinstructions.
2including indirect call/jmp instructions and retinstructions.
27CF'17, May 15-17, 2017, Siena, Italy J. Zhang et al.
Shadow stack has been used to keep track of the called
functions and to store the return addresses in a protected
dedicated memory region. It is considered as an essential
mechanism to guarantee the backward-edge CFI [ 1,4,13].
However, the shadow stack still suers from the following
problems: (1) the software shadow stack needs extra memory
protection mechanism [ 10], and is vulnerable to memory
disclosure [ 8]; (2) the hardware shadow stack relies on the
operation system (OS) to save and restore its content during
process context switches and deeply nested function calls [ 22,
25]; (3) the implementation of shadow stack needs to take
care of some corner cases, such as setjmp/longjmp [4,22],
which might lead to false positives.
In this paper, we propose Return Address Guard (RA-
Guard) that guarantees backward-edge CFI based on hard-
ware. Unlike shadow stack, which guarantees the backward-
edge CFI by tracking the functions called, RAGuard guar-
antees the integrity of the stored return addresses instead.
RAGuard binds each stored return address with a message
authentication code (RAMAC). Compared to the state-of-art
methods [ 20,21] that need support from the OS, RAGuard
utilizes a Physical Unclonable Function (PUF) to generate
authoritative information for newly-forked or rescheduled
process. Thus, RAGuard can verify the integrity of return
addresses by hardware automatically without the support
from OS. The Trusted Computing Base (TCB) is limited only
to the system hardware. Additionally, RAGuard also can
be used to provide protection for the corner cases in shadow
stack.
Our contributions are summarized below.
We propose RAGuard, which enforces the backward-
edge CFI by binding every return address with a
RAMAC. RAGuard utilizes the RAMACs to verify
the integrity of return addresses.
RAGuard leverages a PUF and a hardware hash
function to compute and verify the RAMAC. It com-
pletely isolates the computation and verication of
RAMAC from the software, thus its TCB is limited
only to the system hardware.
The runtime performance overhead of RAGaurd is
evaluated using the SPEC CPU2006 benchmarks on
a Intel Xeon CPU. The evaluation shows that it only
incurs 1.86% runtime overhead.
2 BACKGROUND
RAGuard is a hardware based mechanism for backward-edge
CFI. Before diving into the details of RAGuard, this section
introduces background on CFI enforcement in the following
sections.
2.1 ROP Attacks
Backward-edge CFI is considered as a general method against
return-oriented programming based code reuse attacks (ROP
attackes). ROP attacks utilize gadgets ended with a ret
instruction to hijack control-ow [ 23]. An example of ROP
attacks is shown in Figure 1. Initially, the adversary locates
Extended call semantics:
1:    IF relative near call
2:       THEN IF OperandSize = 32
3:           THEN
4:                tempEIP 
 EIP + DEST;
5:                Push(EIP); 
6:                RAMAC_C 
 fun(EIP);
7:                Push(RAMAC_C);
8:                EIP 
tempEIP;
9:        FI
10:  FI
Extended ret semantics:
1:    IF near return
2:       THEN IF OperandSize = 32
3:           THEN
4:                RAMAC_V 
Pop();
5:    EIP
 Pop(); 
6:  RAMAC_C 
 fun(EIP
) 
7:  IF Match(RAMAC_V, RAMAC_C);
8:      EIP 
 EIP
;
9:   ELSE
10:     Exception;
11:           FI 
12:        FI
13:  FIFigure 1: An example ROP attack.
the payload (a number of return addresses and necessary data
in the red dotted box) into the application's stack or heap
(Step 1). The adversary launches ROP attacks by leveraging
a buer overow vulnerability to overwrite the return address
Aon the stack (Step 2). Then, the control-ow is hijacked
and illegally transferred to gadget A(Step 3). Gadget A
changes the stack pointer (%esp for X86 architecture) to the
beginning of the payload (Step 4), and redirects the control-
ow to the next gadget by executing a retinstruction (Step
5). Then, the gadgets are executed one by one until the
adversary achieve his malicious goal.
2.2 CFI
The rst CFI work, which is proposed by Abadi et al. [1],
instruments software with runtime label checks. Generally,
CFI is coupled with a protected shadow stack to ensure
that each retinstruction only returns to its call-site [1,4].
As the software-based instrumentation and shadow stack
induce high performance overheads [ 1,10], coarse-grained
CFI approaches have been proposed [ 27,28] and shadow
stack is omitted [ 4] for better performance. However, coarse-
grained CFI approaches are not secure enough for some recent
attacks [4, 5, 8].
Several hardware-based CFI approaches [ 3,12,25] have
been developed to reduce the performance overhead of soft-
ware CFI approaches. Budiu et al. [3] introduces new CFI
instructions and a CFI label register to enforce label checks
on each indirect branch. However, a subroutine could be
frequently called by dierent routines, the compiler inserts
the same label at each possible call-side. This allows the
attacker to bend the backward-edge control-ow [ 4]. Lucas
et al. [12] address this problem by decoupling source from
destination labels, and enforcing CFI based on label status.
Specically, they allocate a dierent label to every function.
When a function is called, its label is activated. They en-
force backward-edge CFI by restricting each retinstruction
to return to a active function. These approaches could be
considered as variants of shadow stack, as they keep track of
28RAGuard: A Hardware Based Mechanism for Backward-Edge Control-Flow Integrity CF'17, May 15-17, 2017, Siena, Italy
the called functions by label's status instead of the rst-in,
last-out principle. Similar to shadow stack, these approaches
also require dedicated memory, and require OS to handle
process context switches, then the OS has to be in the TCB.
Therefore, if the OS is subverted, the protection can not be
ensured. In contrast, our proposed RAGuard utilizes the
RAMACs to verify the integrity of return addresses, which
does not need the support from OS, and reduces TCB only
to the system hardware. On the other hand, RAGuard is
an orthogonal approach, their methods provide wonderful
forward-edge CFI protection for us, our method improves the
exibility and enhances the security for their backward-edge
CFI protection.
2.3 MAC of Return Address
The rst work that inserts a MAC for return address is
StackGuard [ 9]. StackGuard places a pre-dened secure value
on the program stack next to a return address. The secure
value could be string terminators or randomly generated
numbers. When a function returns, the secure value is veried
by the function epilogue to make sure that it remains intact.
Then, Frantzen et al. [13] and Tuck et al. [21] protect the
return address by storing the encrypted return address on
the program stack. However, the MACs of these techniques
only contain the information of return address, and can be
used to implement replay attacks. So these techniques can
not guarantee backward-edge CFI.
Cryptographic CFI (CCFI) [ 20], which encrypts the signa-
ture of the return address instead of the the return address,
can provide CFI protection eectively. Because CCFI ran-
domly generates the key of AES at program start, it needs
the OS to save and restore the MAC key during the pro-
cess context switches. Moreover, CCFI incurs non-ignorable
performance overhead, even though it takes advantage of
cryptographic CPU instructions (AES.NI). In contrast, RA-
Guard does not need the support from the OS by proposing a
novel key management method based on PUF to support the
process context switches. It also improves the performance
of backward-edge CFI by using a hardware hash function.
3 SYSTEM MODEL
3.1 Threat Model and Assumptions
This paper focuses on backward-edge CFI. We assume that
the forward-edge CFI has been eciently enforced by the
previous solutions, but adversary can exploit memory cor-
ruption vulnerabilities to launch ROP attacks. Adversaries
have arbitrary read access to application's code, full control
over the program's stack and heap, and circumvent ASLR
(Address Space Layout Randomization) schemes to get the
layout of applications memory. We assume the starting stack
location is randomly chosen at program startup to preven-
t alignment of return address and RAMAC, which makes
replay attacks possible.
Another assumption is that the Operating System (OS)
may have vulnerabilities, which could be exploited to under-
mine security mechanisms, such as saving and restoring the
Stack growth
Extended call semantics:
1:    IF relative near call
2:       THEN IF OperandSize = 32
3:           THEN
4:                tempEIP 
EIP + DEST;
5:                push(EIP); 
6:                RAMAC_C 
 fun(EIP);
7:                push(RAMAC_C);
8:                EIP 
 tempEIP;
9:        FI
10:  FI
Extended ret semantics:
1:    IF near return
2:       THEN IF OperandSize = 32
3:           THEN
4:                RAMAC_V 
pop();
5:    EIP
 pop(); 
6: RAMAC_C 
 fun(EIP
) 
7: IF match(RAMAC_V, RAMAC_C);
8:     EIP 
 EIP
;
9:  ELSE
10:      exception ();
11:            FI 
12:        FI
13:  FIFigure 2: Comparison between (a)traditional stack
layout, and (b)RAGuard stack layout.
consent of shadow stack. We assume that the TCB of our
system is limited to the system hardware, and the hash func-
tion of RAGuard resists preimage attacks. We also assume
that hardware attacks are not part of the thread model.
3.2 Desired Properties
In order to overcome the shortage of pervious mechanisms,
RAGuard should contain the following desired properties.
P1Secure: The RAMAC computation and veri-
cation should be completely isolated from software,
and the secret information should never leave the
hardware chip.
P2Transparent: Developers should not need to
design programs any dierently in order to make use
of our mechanism.
P3Low-cost: No substantial increase of area over-
head and manufacturing complexity.
4 RAGUARD MECHANISM
RAGuard guarantees the backward-edge CFI by verifying
the integrity of return addresses. Unlike shadow stack that
stores return addresses in a dedicated memory, RAGuard
binds a RAMAC to each stored return address as shown
in Figure 2. To guarantee the security of RAMAC, PUF
is used to generate authoritative information for program
process, and a hardware hash function is used to compute
the RAMAC. The authoritative information is generated by
hardware, and the integrity verication of return addresses is
completely isolated from software, thus our TCB is limited
only to the system hardware ( P1). Additionally, RAGuard
also can be used to provide protection for setjmp/longjmp.
4.1 RAMAC Computation
Similar to CCFI [ 20], the signature of our method contains
the following items:
Return Address (RA): It is the key information
that MAC veries.
Stack Pointer (SP ):The position of the return
address in the program stack. Including the SP in
the signature ensures that an attackers cannot swap
29CF'17, May 15-17, 2017, Siena, Italy J. Zhang et al.
a return address stored in one memory address with
a pointer stored in a dierent memory address.
Authoritative Information ( PAI):The signa-
ture must contain some secret information (called
PAI), which cannot be obtained by attackers. It is
challenging that PAIshould never leave the hard-
ware and also be retrievable when the process is
scheduled to run. Thanks to the fundamental char-
acteristics of PUF [ 14,16,17,19,29], RAGuard can
securely generate and retrieve exclusive PAIfor
each process. We use the process characteristic infor-
mation as the PUF challenge. In our implementation,
we use process ID (PID) as the process characteristic
information. The response of that PUF is used as
PAI.
First, we derive the signature of the return address, denot-
ed by SIG, thus we have,
SIG =RAjjSPjjPAI (1)
Then, RAMAC is computed as the hash value of SIG, thus
we have,
RAMAC =HASH (SIG) (2)
where HASH(.) denotes the hardware hash function.
4.2 Architecture Support
In the design of RAGuard, two dedicated registers are in-
troduced: ramac candramac v, and the semantics of call
andretinstructions are extended to perform the RAMAC
computation and verication. Specically,
Call Instruction :Besides pushing its return address
on stack and transferring to the target function, RAGuard
computes the RAMAC of the return address, and stores it
inramac cregister.
Ret Instruction :Besides popping the return address out
of stack and decreasing the espas usual, the RAMAC on the
stack is loaded into ramac vregister. RAGuard recomputes
the RAMAC for the popped return address and matches it
with the one in ramac vregister. A mismatch indicates that
the popped return address or the RAMAC was modied by
attackers, thus an exception is raised by RAGuard.
We propose two methods to place RAMAC next to the
return address on the stack, i.e., RAGuard-I and RAGuard-II.
Specically,
RAGuard-I: RAGuard pushes the ramac cregister on
the stack after the callinstruction and pop the RAMAC out
before the retinstruction. This method can be implemented
by inserting a push instruction and a popinstruction in the
function's prologue and epilogue, respectively, as shown in
Figure 3. In order to guarantee the correctness of the program
executions, the architecture register ramac cmust be saved
if there is a context switch after the callinstruction.
RAGuard-II: As shown in Figure 4, RAGuard-II extends
the semantics of original callandretinstructions, and these
two instructions access ramac candramac vregister inter-
nally. Thus these two new registers are considered as internal
registers and they are architectural invisible. The atomicity
Func
tion prologue code:
1: push  ramac_c
2: push  rbp3: mov  rsp, rbp4: sub  rsp, NFunc
tion epilogue code:
1: mov  rbp, rsp2: pop  rbp3: pop  ramac_v4: ret
E
xtended call semantics:
1: IF relative near call2:     THEN IF OperandSize = 323:        THEN
4: tempEIP  EIP + DEST
5: push(EIP);6: ramac_c  fun(EIP);
7: push(ramac_c);8: EIP  tempEIP;
9:       FI
10: FI
E
xtended ret semantics:
1:  IF near return2:     THEN IF OperandSize = 323:        THEN
4: ramac_v  pop();
5: EIP’  pop();
6: ramac_c  fun(EIP’);
7: IF match(ramac_v, ramac_c)
8:     EIP  EIP’;
9: ELSE10:    exception();11:              FI12:       FI13: FIFigure 3: Function prologue and epilogue modica-
tion to support RAGuard-I.
Function prologue code:
1: push  ramac_c
2: push  rbp
3: mov  rsp , rbp
4: sub  rsp , NFunction epilogue code:
1: mov  rbp , rsp
2: pop  rbp
3: pop  ramac_v
4: ret
Extended call semantics:
1: IF relative near call
2:     THEN IF OperandSize = 32
3:        THEN
4: tempEIP  EIP + DEST
5: push(EIP);
6: ramac_ c  fun(EIP);
7: push(ramac_c);
8: EIP  tempEIP;
9:       FI
10: FI
Extended ret semantics:
1:  IF near return
2:     THEN IF OperandSize = 32
3:        THEN
4: ramac_ v  pop();
5: EIP    pop();
6: ramac_ c  fun(EIP );
7: IF match(ramac_v , ramac_c)
8:     EIP  EIP ;
9: ELSE
10:    exception ();
11:              FI
12:       FI
13: FI 
Figure 4: Extension of instruction semantics to sup-
port RAGuard-II.
does not require any OS modications with acceptable hard-
ware cost. However, pushing the RAMAC on the program
stack by hardware directly will break the relative position
between the frame pointer and parameters. Thus RAGuard-
II also needs to patch the compiler to allocate address space
for RAMAC.
To protect setjmp/longjmp, the RAMAC is saved into the
environment buer by the setjmp functions, and restored by
thelongjmp functions.
As stated above, these two methods are both practicable
and transparent to program developers (P2 ).
Traditionally the return address will be used as Program
Counter (PC) in next cycle after being loaded. It is dicult
to verify the RAMAC in one cycle. According the previous
study [ 18], verication result can be reported at a later time.
Thus these both methods only add extra memory operations
to each function.
30RAGuard: A Hardware Based Mechanism for Backward-Edge Control-Flow Integrity CF'17, May 15-17, 2017, Siena, Italy
5 IMPLEMENTATION
As instroduced in Section 4, our RAGuard mechanism can
be applied to the traditional processor architectures. In this
section, we implement our RAGuard mechanism on the open-
source LEON3 processor [ 6], which is released in open-source,
for example.
The structure of our RAGuard mechanism is shown in
Figure 5. We add a hardware RAMAC generator module
(ramac gen) to the iu3 module (inside the dash line)3. The
ramc genmodule contains the following components: ra-
guard ctrl,PUF, hwhash, and lsuq(for RAGuard-I, RAMAC
is stored and loaded by instructions, lsuqis not needed). The
added data pathes are denoted as blue lines. In order to
facilitate the RAMAC compution, we also add four registers:
pinf,pai,ramac candramac v.
In 64-bit architectures, the maximum PID number could
be up to 4,194,303 [ 2]. Thus, PIDs can be expressed by a 22-
bit binary. We set the input and output of the PUF module
as 32-bit. The width of that input is larger than that of
PIDs, which allows us to include more process characteristic
information in the future. RAandSPare both set to 32-bit4,
thus the input of the hardware hash function is 96-bit. The
time complexity of attack, which can be expressed as 2n,
depends on hash function's output size n. The larger the
output size, the higher the bar for attacks in practice. In order
to simplify the performance evaluation, we set the output
size as 32-bit and 64-bit for 32-bit and 64-bit architectures
respectively, and use a hardware hash function with only 1
cycle latency [ 15]. The area overhead of the hash function is
about 4K GE( P3).
As shown in Figure 5, raguard ctrlmodule monitors the
instructions at the decode stage (DE), and maintains a state
machine to control the RAMAC computation and verication.
The state machine is shown in Figure 6.
When a process is scheduled to run, the PID register of the
processor5is reset. Meanwhile, the value of pinfregister is
updated automatically. raguard ctrlmodule sends a process
authoritative information update command (pai.update ) to
the PUF module, and its status becomes spuf. The PUF
module uses the new value of pinfregister as its challenge.
Its response is stored in the pairegister. When the process
authoritative information update is done, the PUF mod-
ule sends a response ( pai.update done ) back to raguard ctrl
module.
When there is a callinstruction at the DE stage, a RA-
MAC computing command (call.mac generate ) is sent to
hwhash module, and the status of raguard ctrlmodule be-
comes shwhash. After receiving this command, hwhash
module uses the signature of the return address as the input
of the hardware hash function to compute RAMAC (i.e.,
Equation (2)). When the RAMAC is prepared, raguard ctrl
module sends a RAMAC storing command (call.mac store )
3The code modication and the system evaluation on a Digilent
Nexys4DDR board will be nished about two month later.
4In 64-bit architecture, the upper 32 bits of virtual address are
0xFFFFFFFF, so we only use the lower 32 bits.
5For LEON3, the context number is the corresponding PID register.
s_pufcall.mac_generate
ret.mac_verify
s_lsuqs_hw_hash s_raguard_ctrl Figure 6: State machine of the raguard ctrlmodule.
tolsuqmodule. Then the callinstruction is submitted (cal-
l.mac submit ). As the RAMAC is computed in parallel with
the processor pipeline, and it can be sent to lsuq later, the
RAMAC computation will not incur any pipeline stall.
When there is a retinstruction at the DE stage, rst-
ly,raguard ctrlmodule sends a RAMAC loading command
(ret.mac load) tolsuq module. RAMAC is loaded from the
program stack and stored in ramac vregister. Meanwhile,
theretinstruction pops the return address out of the pro-
gram stack at the XC stage. Then, raguard ctrlmodule
sends a RAMAC calculation command (ret.mac generate ) to
hwhash module. After receiving the RAMAC calculation
command, hwhash module recomputes the RAMAC of that
return address, and sends it back to raguard ctrlmodule.
Finally, raguard ctrlmodule compares the re-computed RA-
MAC with the one in the ramac vregister. If a mismatch
occurs, an exception will be raised, and the execution is
transferred to the exception handler routine.
5.1 PUF Module
Silicon PUFs exploit uncontrollable process variations in
fabrication technology to generate secret key information
[14,16,17,19,29]. Their novel properties, such as unclon-
ability, robustness, unpredictability, and tamper-evidence,
make them very appealing for the process's authoritative
information management of our RAGuard mechanism. How-
ever, the response latency of PUFs is critical to our RAGurad
mechanism. PUF is used to generate the authoritative infor-
mation when a process is scheduled to run. Long response
latency will incur extra overhead during process context
switches6.
Several candidates are listed in Table 1. All these PUFs will
not incur notable context switch and area overhead. However,
err-puf [ 29], Bitline PUF [ 14] and MECCA PUF [ 19] are
required to modify the control logic of memory. In contrast,
the LR-PUF [ 17] and VIA PUF [ 16] can be integrated into
system as intellectual property (IP) cores. We prefer to the
6Usually, the context switch time is about 100-200 microseconds [ 30].
Context switch time is the time spend in the OS to switch from one
process to another.
31CF'17, May 15-17, 2017, Siena, Italy J. Zhang et al.
i
cache
l
suqr
egfileM
P IRQ ctrli
mm r
d r
fa
M
UX
z
ero
M
UX
A
LU
M
UXr
esultr
esultT
rap 
address
b
ranch 
addressn
pc
M
UXd
cache
r
aguard_ctrl
h
w_hash P
UFex
ceptionpc p
cctrl.pc ctrl.pcctrl.pc ctrl.pcctrl.inst ctrl.inst ctrl.instctrl.instinstctrl.rd ctrl.rd ctrl.rd ctrl.rd
trap addressbranch addressop1
op2
c
trl.inst
ctrl.pcspr
p_aiF
E DE RA EX MA XC WB
i
u3r
amac_genp_infr
amac_v r
amac_c
 
Figure 5: Our RAGuard mechanism is implemented on LEON3, which uses a 7 stages pipeline (Instruction
Fetch (FE), Decode (DE), Register Access (RA), Execute (EX), Memory (ME), Exception (XC), and Write
(WR)). A RAMAC generator module (ramac gen, inside the dash line) is added to the LEON3 pipeline. The
added data pathes are denoted as blue lines.
Table 1: Candidates of PUF module
Structure Response latency Area overhead
err-PUF1[29]cell error rate distribution of
STT-RAM2.32µs 2.9102µs2
Bitline PUF [14]SRAM with modied
wordline drivers64 memory write operations
and 1 memory read
operation (about 0.16 µs)22048 GE3
MECCA PUF [19]SRAM with a
programmable delay
generator2 memory write operations
and 1 memory read
operation20 GE4
LR-PUF5[17]arbiter PUF with
reconguration ctrol logic1069 clock cycles (about 1
µs at 1 GHz)6974 GE
VIA PUF [16]via holes between two metal
layers1 memory read operation nearly zero6
1The response latency and area overhead is evaluated with the 45nm technology.
2For a 256-column by 256-row SRAM with a 5ns cycle time, the response latency is 512 write memory
operations and 1 memory read operation (2.6 µs) [14].
3Bitline PUF's area overhead is only a single ip-op and two logic gates (8 GE) per row of SRAM. The
area overhead is estimated based on a 256-column by 256-row SRAM.
4MECCA PUF's area overhead is a programmable delay generator. The area overhead is estimated based
on programmable delay generator with 4 duty cycles.
5LR-PUF is run with 80-bit challenge line and 64-bit response line.
6VIA PUF is not built on via holes between two metal layers, but needs dedicated reading circuit.
32RAGuard: A Hardware Based Mechanism for Backward-Edge Control-Flow Integrity CF'17, May 15-17, 2017, Siena, Italy
Table 2: Experiment setup
CPU Type Intel Xeon E5645
#Cores 6 cores@2.4GHz
#Sockets 2
Memory 16G, DDR3
Operating system Centos 6.6 with Linux kernel 2.6.32
Workload SPEC CPU2006
Compiler LLVM 3.8.1
Baseline -O3
RAGuard -O3 and optimized with a LLVM pass
bzip2gccmcfnamdsoplexhmmersjeng
libquantumlbmastarmean0.000.010.020.030.040.050.060.070.08Performance Overhead
0.71
0.06
0.12
0.11
0.07
0.68
4.79
0.01
0.12
1.39
0.81
Figure 7: Performance overhead of RAGuard.
latter one, as it can be implemented without bit-error, and
it is avialable [16](P3 ).
6 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
To evaluate the performance overhead of our RAGuard mech-
anism, we re-compile the SPEC CPU2006 benchmark appli-
cations [ 24] with Low Level Virtual Machine (LLVM) [ 7], and
insert two extra memory operation instructions to each func-
tion by a LLVM pass. The details of experiment environment
is listed in Table 2.
We evaluate the runtime performance overhead of RA-
Guard. As shown in Figure 7, the y-asis shows that the
runtime overhead normalized to the baseline, i.e., the run-
time of the processor architecture without RAGuard. The
value on each bar is the absolute runtime overhead in sec-
onds resulted from RAGuard. In average, RAGuard incurs
1.86% runtime degradation. The worst-case is 6.92% for gcc.
Except for gccand sjeng , RAGuard incurs less than 1.5%
degradation for the rest of the cases.
Figure 8 shows the code size of RAGuard-I normalized to
the baseline, i.e., the code size of the processor architecture
without RAGuard. The value on each bar is the absolute
code size overhead. The average code size overhead resulted
from RAGuard-I is 2.72%, and the worst-case is 4.22% for
soplex . For RAGuard-II, RAMAC is pushed on the program
stack by the callinstruction and popped out of the program
stack by the retinstruction, thus this method does not incur
any code size overhead.
bzip2gccmcfnamdsoplexhmmersjeng
libquantumlbmastarmean0.000.010.020.030.040.05Code Bloat
4,123
118,952
793
785
20,669
10,667
5,504
1,880
502
952
16,483Figure 8: Size of added code size for RAGuard-I.
7 SECURITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we analyze the security of our RAGuard
mechanism. We only discuss the attacks that leverage the
backward edges, such as ROP attacks. Additionally, the se-
curity of RAGuard also relies on the complexity of computed
RAMAC. Hence, we also analyze the eect of the complexity
of computed RAMAC in the security of RAGuard.
7.1 Return-Oriented Programming
In ROP attacks, attackers have to overwrite return addresses
on the stack and locate their payload into the application's
heap/stack (as shown in Figure 1). The malicious return ad-
dresses in the payload may redirect control ow to arbitrary
code locations or unintentional call-sites. In the former case,
attackers have to compute the RAMACs for their dummy
return addresses. In the latter case, attackers might carry
out the splicing attack by constructing payload with the
existing return address and corresponding RAMAC. This
way violates our RAMAC verication. When a return ad-
dress and its corresponding RAMAC are inserted on another
location, the stack pointer of the new location mismatches
with the RAMAC. Hence, attackers also have to recompute
the RAMACs for their malicious return addresses.
Recently, a special ROP attack, Control-Flow Bending
(CFB) [ 4], has been proposed, which implements code-reuse
attacks within the valid CFG to achieve Turing-complete
computation. In the CFB attack, attackers could utilize the
dispatcher function to overwrite the return address to return
to any location where the dispatcher function is called. Our
mechanism also can prevent CFB attacks, because attackers
also have to overwrite the RAMAC correctly besides the
return address stored on the program stack.
7.2 RAMAC Security
As shown in Section 5, RAMAC is computed with a one-
way hardware hash function, which takes the signature of
the return address as the input. A PUF module is used to
dynamically update the pairegister during context switching.
As the hardware hash function is not visible to attackers,
and the pairegister is only accessed by hardware, they
cannot infer the the algorithm of the hardware hash function.
33CF'17, May 15-17, 2017, Siena, Italy J. Zhang et al.
Moreover, the pairegister is updated at runtime, which
makes RAMAC more dicult to attack.
8 CONCLUSION
This work presents RAGuard, an ecient hardware-based
mechanism for backward-edge CFI. RAGuard binds every
return address with RAMAC to guarantee the integrity of
return addresses on the program stack. The security of
RAMAC is provided by a PUF module and a hardware
hash function, thus it can be stored on the program stack.
By completely isolating the computation and verication of
RAMAC from the system software, RAGurad reduces the
TCB to the system hardware. Compared to the baseline
processor architecture,RAGuard only incurs 1.86% runtime
overhead on average.
9 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank to Chen Zheng, Zhen Ji-
a, Haiyang Pan, Lili Sun, Yizhong Hu, and Yang Cao for
their kind help on the work. We also thank the anonymous
reviewers for their valuable comments. This work was sup-
ported by the China National Science Fund for Outstanding
Young Scholars under grant No. 61522212, Frontier Science
Research Projects, Chinese Academy of Science, under grant
No. QYZDB-SSW-JSC010, National Key R&D Plan under
grant No. 2016YFB1000400, and National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC) under grant No. 61521092.
REFERENCES
[1]Mart n Abadi, Mihai Budiu, Ulfar Erlingsson, and Jay Ligatti.
2005. Control-ow integrity. In proc. 12th ACM Conference on
Computer and Communications Security (CCS) . 340{353.
[2]Daniel Bovet and Marco Cesati. 2005. Understanding the Linux
kernel. O'Reilly Media, Inc.
[3]Mihai Budiu, Ulfar Erlingsson, and Mart n Abadi. 2006. Archi-
tectural support for software-based protection. In 1st Workshop
on Architectural and System Support for Improving Software
Dependability (ASID). 42{51.
[4]Nicholas Carlini, Antonio Barresi, Mathias Payer, David Wagner,
and Thomas R. Gross. 2015. Control-ow bending: on the eec-
tiveness of control-ow integrity. In Proc. 24th USENIX Security
Symposium (SEC). 161{176.
[5]Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. 2014. ROP is still danger-
ous: breaking modern defenses. In Proc. 23rd USENIX Security
Symposium (SEC). 385{399.
[6]Cobham Gaisler. 2017. LEON3 processor. http://www.gaisler.
com/index.php/products/processors/leon3. (2017).
[7]The LLVM compiler infrastructure. 2017. LLVM Overview. http:
//llvm.org/. (2017).
[8]Mauro Conti, Stephen Crane, Lucas Davi, Michael Franz, Per
Larsen, Marco Negro, Christopher Liebchen, Mohaned Qunaibit,
and Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. 2015. Losing control: on the eective-
ness of control-ow integrity under stack attacks. In Proc. 22nd
ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security
(CCS) . 952{963.
[9]Crispan Cowan, Calton Pu, Dave Maier, Jonathan Walpole, Peat
Bakke, Steve Beattie, Aaron Grier, Perry Wagle, Qian Zhang, and
Heather Hinton. 1998. StackGuard: automatic adaptive detection
and prevention of buer-overow attacks. In Proc. 7th Usenix
Security Symposium (SEC) . 63{78.
[10] Thurston H.Y. Dang, Petros Maniatis, and David Wagner. 2015.
The performance cost of shadow stacks and stack canaries. In
Proc. 10th ACM Symposium on Information, Computer and
Communications Security (ASIACCS). 555{566.
[11] Lucas Davi. 2015. Code-reuse attacks and defenses . Ph.D.
Dissertation. Technische Universit at, Darmstadt. http://tuprints.ulb.tu-darmstadt.de/4622/
[12] Lucas Davi, Matthias Hanreich, Debayan Paul, Ahmad-Reza
Sadeghi, Patrick Koeberl, Dean Sullivan, Orlando Arias, and Yier
Jin. 2015. HAFIX: hardware-assisted ow integrity extension.
InProc. 52nd ACM Annual Design Automation Conference
(DAC). 74:1{74:6.
[13] Michael Frantzen and Michael Shuey. 2001. StackGhost: hardware
facilitated stack protection. In Proc. 10th USENIX Security
Symposium (SEC).
[14] Daniel E. Holcomb and Kevin Fu. 2014. Bitline PUF: building
native challenge-response PUF capability into any SRAM. In
16th International Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems (CHES) . 510{526.
[15] Nan Hua, Eric Norige, Sailesh Kumar, and Bill Lynch. 2011. Non-
crypto hardware hash functions for high performance networking
ASICs. In Proc. 7th IEEE Symposium on Architectures for
Networking and Communications Systems (ANCS). 156{166.
[16] ICTK. 2017. VIA PUF. http://www.ictk.com/servicenproduct/
puf. (2017).
[17] Stefan Katzenbeisser, Unal Ko cabas, Vincent van der Leest,
Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, Geert-Jan Schrijen, Heike Schr oder, and
Christian Wachsmann. 2011. Recyclable PUFs: logically recong-
urable PUFs. In 13th International Conference on Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems (CHES) . 374{389.
[18] Mehmet Kayaalp, Timothy Schmitt, Junaid Nomani, Dmitry
Ponomarev, and Nael Abu-Ghazaleh. 2013. SCRAP: architec-
ture for signature-based protection from code reuse attacks. In
Proc. 19th IEEE International Symposium on High Perfor-
mance Computer Architecture (HPCA). 258{269.
[19] Aswin Raghav Krishna, Seetharam Narasimhan, Xinmu Wang,
and Xinmu Wang. 2011. MECCA: a robust low-overhead PUF
using embedded memory array. In 13th International Conference
on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems (CHES) .
407{420.
[20] Ali Jose Mashtizadeh, Andrea Bittau, Dan Boneh, and David
Mazi eres. 2015. CCFI: cryptographically enforced control ow
integrity. In Proc. 22nd ACM Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (CCS) . 941{951.
[21] Tuck Nathan, Calder Brad, and Varghese George. 2004. Hardware
and binary modication support for code pointer protection from
buer overow. In Proc. 37th IEEE International Symposium
on Microarchitecture (Micro). 209{220.
[22] H. Ozdoganoglu, T. N. Vijaykumar, C. E. Brodley, B. A. Kuper-
man, and A. Jalote. 2006. SmashGuard: a hardware solution to
prevent security attacks on the function return address. IEEE
Trans. Comput. (2006), 1271{1285.
[23] Hovav Shacham. 2007. The geometry of innocent esh on the bone:
return-into-libc without function calls (on the x86). In Proc. 14th
ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security
(CCS) . 552{561.
[24] Standard Performance Evaluation Corporation (SPEC). 2011.
SPEC CPU2006 Benchmark. (2011). http://www.spec.org/
cpu2006/
[25] Dean Sullivan, Orlando Arias, Lucas Davi, Per Larsen, Ahmad-
reza Sadeghi, and Yier Jin. 2016. Strategy without tactics: policy-
agnostic hardware-enhanced control-ow integrity. In proc. 53rd
ACM Design Automation Conference (DAC). 163:1{163:6.
[26] Caroline Tice, Tom Roeder, Peter Collingbourne, Stephen Check-
oway, Ulfar Erlingsson, Luis Lozano, and Geo Pike. 2014. En-
forcing forward-edge control-ow integrity in GCC & LLVM. In
Proc. 23rd USENIX Security Symposium (SEC). 941{955.
[27] Chao Zhang, Tao Wei, Zhaofeng Chen, Lei Duan, Laszlo Szekeres,
Stephen McCamant, Dawn Song, and Wei Zou. 2013. Practical
control ow integrity and randomization for binary executables.
InProc. 34th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P).
559{573.
[28] Mingwei Zhang and R. Sekar. 2013. Control ow integrity for
COTS binaries. In Proc. 22nd USENIX Security Symposium
(SEC). 337{352.
[29] Xian Zhang, Guangyu Sun, Yaojun Zhang, Yiran Chen, Hai Li,
Wujie Wen, and Jia Di. 2016. A novel PUF based on cell error rate
distribution of STT-RAM. In Proc. 21st IEEE Asia and South
Pacic Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC). 342{347.
[30] Cheng Zheng, Jianfeng Zhan, Zhen Jia, and Lixin Zhang. 2013.
Characterizing OS behavior of scale-out data center workloads.
In7th Workshop on the Interaction amongst Virtualization,
Operating Systems and Computer Architecture (WIVOSCA).
34