Gyro in the Air: Tracking 3D Orientation
of Batteryless Internet-of-Things
Teng Wei and Xinyu Zhang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Wisconsin - Madison
twei7@wisc.edu, xyzhang@ece.wisc.edu
ABSTRACT
3D orientation tracking is an essential ingredient for many Internet-
of-Things applications. Yet existing orientation tracking systems
commonly require motion sensors that are only available on battery-
powered devices. In this paper, we propose Tagyro, which attaches
an array of passive RFID tags as orientation sensors on everyday
objects. Tagyro uses a closed-form model to transform the run-
time phase offsets between tags into orientation angle. To enable
orientation tracking in 3D space, we found the key challenge lies
in the imperfect radiation pattern of practical tags, caused by the
antenna polarity, non-isotropic emission and electromagnetic cou-
pling, which substantially distort phase measurement. We address
these challenges by designing a set of phase sampling and recovery
algorithms, which together enable reliable orientation sensing with
3 degrees of freedom. We have implemented a real-time version of
Tagyro on a commodity RFID system. Our experiments show that
Tagyro can track the 3D orientation of passive objects with a small
error of 4, at a processing rate of 37.7 samples per second.
CCS Concepts
Human-centered computing !Ubiquitous computing; Ambi-
ent intelligence;Hardware!Digital signal processing; Beam-
forming; Sensors and actuators; Sensor devices and platforms;
Keywords
Wireless Sensing; Orientation Tracking; Internet-of-Things; RFID;
Tag Array; Coupling Effect
1. INTRODUCTION
3D orientation is an essential input to many pervasive applica-
tions, such as motion tracking [1], mobile gaming, and activity
recognition [2]. However, existing orientation tracking systems
commonly require motion sensors like gyroscope and compass, which
are only available on battery-powered devices. Tracking the ori-
entation of passive batteryless objects is an equally important but
more challenging problem.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
MobiCom’16, October 03-07, 2016, New York City, NY, USA
c2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4226-1/16/10. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2973750.2973761
Smart Home Gaming
 Production Line Supply Chain
Figure 1: Applications of passive orientation sensing in IoT.
A passive orientation sensing system can enable many new Internet-
of-Things (IoT) applications (Figure 1). For example, in smart-
home environment, it can monitor the rotation and placement of
daily objects (e.g., detecting door closure and monitoring activ-
ity of a rolling chair). In a supply chain, it can detect the tilt
angle of orientation-sensitive cargo and warn the human workers
when necessary. Orientation information of products on a conveyor
belt can assist robotic arms to pick up an item using proper pos-
ture. Likewise, there exist numerous applications in mobile gaming
(e.g., guiding the positioning of LEGO pieces) and library man-
agement (e.g., detecting upside down books). Existing passive ori-
entation tracking solutions are predominantly based on computer
vision [3–7]. Such systems often require extensive per-object per-
angle training. They are sensitive to background variation, ambient
light condition, and occlusion. Therefore, they are unsuitable for
ad-hoc IoT applications.
In this paper, we propose Tagyro, which can track the 3D orienta-
tion of passive objects using RFID tags. The basic idea is to attach
multiple tags to different spots on the object, which constitute a tag
array. Some example array patterns are illustrated in Figure 2. An
RFID reader can measure the tag phase, i.e., the phase of signals re-
turned from each tag. When the tag array rotates together with the
object, the tag-to-reader distance among different tags varies, which
in turn affects the relative phase offset between tags (referred to as
phase difference of arrival or PDoA). Tagyro builds a closed-form
model that transforms the measured PDoA into an orientation spec-
trum, which characterizes the likelihood of each orientation angle.
It then derives the tag array’s 2D orientation from the peak of orien-
tation spectrum. By attaching an additional RFID antenna and tag
array, Tagyro can aggregate the outputs from multiple 2D estima-
tors and produce a 3D orientation estimation for the target object.
Realizing such an RFID-based 3D orientation tracking entails
three key challenges that are unaddressed in previous RFID sens-
ing systems [8–12]. First, to prevent phase ambiguity, adjacent
tags in a tag array must be placed within close proximity. How-
ever, our experiments reveal that the closely-placed tags tend to
alter each other’s phases due to sophisticated electromagnetic in-
teractions. Such coupling effect deviates the phase value from the
traditional phase-distance model [8]. To address this issue, we pro-
pose an Array Layout Sensing (ALS) algorithm, which approxi-
552-tag 3-tag 4-tag
4-tag 6-tag 8-tagLinear
RectangularFigure 2: Examples of linear and square tag
arrays from the top view (showing cross sec-
tions of tags).
AntennaTag ArrayReader Coordinate
SystemX
YZTag1 Tag2Tag3 Tag4
θXθZ
θYFigure 3: Coordinate system refers to the
reader antenna. Tag orientation is deﬁned
as the rotation offset ( X,Y,Z) along each
axis.
Initial offset θ𝑖𝑍X
YReader Coordinate 
System
Reader signal 
directiond𝑖
ZTag 1Tag irotates 
by θ𝑍Figure 4: Relation between the tags’
PDoA and rotation angle. This exam-
ple shows rotation along the Z-axis (by
projecting to the X-Y plane).
mately models the coupling effect as if the tags repel each other
in the physical space. ALS also enables Tagyro to automatically
sense the tag array’s effective layout – a critical input for the ori-
entation spectrum computation. Consequently, ALS also frees the
user from knowing the array’s physical layout or placing the array
with precise geometry.
Second, the radiation pattern of a practical RFID tag is far from
the ideal isotropic model, i.e., a point source that scatters signals
uniformly in 3D space. Instead, it has blind directions with ex-
tremely weak emissions, rendering phase measurement infeasible.
Tagyro addresses this challenge using a dual-array setup, where two
arrays are arranged in orthogonal angles to compensate the blind di-
rections. Tagyro can single out valid phase readings, and then unify
the results to estimate the object’s orientation with 3 degrees-of-
freedom (DoF).
Third, commercial FCC-compliant RFID readers run in the freq-
uency-hopping mode and interrogate the tags sequentially, which
cause phase discontinuity and signiﬁcantly slow down the orien-
tation sensing. We design a simple per-reader phase calibration
mechanism, along with phase interpolation, which improves the
phase-reading precision/granularity.
Tagyro, to our knowledge, represents the ﬁrst wireless sensing
system that can track the 3D orientation of passive objects. Its con-
tributions can be summarized as follows.
(i)We propose an RFID tag-array setup for phase-based orien-
tation tracking, and empirically study the impact of tags’ imper-
fect radiation patterns on phase reading. Our study reveals how
the tag polarity, blind direction and coupling effect distort phase
measurement, which has not been reported by previous RFID sens-
ing/localization systems [8–14].
(ii)We propose an innovative algorithm to sense the effective
layout of a tag array, which overcomes the tag coupling effect. We
further propose mechanisms to combat the tags’ non-isotropic ra-
diation patterns, enabling orientation sensing in 3D space without
blind direction. We have also developed phase calibration mecha-
nisms and enabled fast orientation sensing on standard-compliant
RFID devices.
(iii)We implement Tagyro on a COTS RFID system as a real-
time 3D orientation sensing framework. Our experimental results
show that Tagyro can track the 3-DoF orientation of an object at an
average accuracy of 4, with processing rate >37.7 samples/second
and response latency <0.75 seconds. Tagyro achieves compara-
ble accuracy and sampling rate as state-of-the-art gyroscope-based
systems [15], but it needs no battery on the object, and evades the
notorious drifting issue.
2. PRELIMINARIES
2.1 Phase Model for an RFID System
An RFID reader can transmit continuous-wave signals to inter-
rogate a tag, and then receive backscattered signals from the tagwhich contains its unique identity information. The phase offset
between the transmitted and received signals depends on the round-
trip propagation distance d, as well as hardware-speciﬁc factors.
Following a standard phase-distance model [8, 16], the phase value
, also referred to as tag phase, equals:
=mod(2d
+Reader +Tag;2); (1)
wheredenotes the signal wavelength, and Reader andTagare the
additional phase offsets induced by the reader’s transmission/recei-
ving circuits and tag’s antenna response. Eq. (1) implies that a sin-
gle tag is insufﬁcient for 3D orientation sensing, because simply
changing the tag’s orientation may not change the distance dand
the phase.
2.2 Phase Difference of Arrival of a Tag Array
The basic idea of our approach is to form a tag array with mul-
tiple tags. Due to different distances to the reader, the tags cause
different phase offsets, which we call the Phase Difference of Ar-
rival (PDoA). Rotation of the tag array results in different PDoA
values, from which we can estimate the orientation of the tag array,
and hence the orientation of the object it is attached to.
Consider Figure 3 where 4 tags form a square array. We ﬁrst
specify a 3D coordinate system for the RFID reader, in which the
X-axis is parallel to the direction from the reader to the center of
the tag array, and the X-Y plane is parallel to the ground. The tag
array’s orientation is deﬁned as the rotation offset ( X,Y,Z) along
each axis, relative to an initial state speciﬁed by the user. This coor-
dinate system allows us to track the tag array’s orientation from the
reader antenna’s perspective. Note that Tagyro is different from ac-
tive motion sensors (gyroscope and magnetometer) [15], since the
coordinate system will change w.r.t. to the position of the tag array.
On the other hand, active motion sensors are location-independent
because gravitational and magnetic ﬁelds on earth are used as the
reference coordinate.
Figure 4 illustrates the rotation around the Z-axis by projecting
3D space on to the X-Y plane. In this example, signals ﬁrst reach
tag1before tagi, and thus PDoA (tag ito tag 1) is positive. More
generally, the direction and amount of rotation determine the sign
and value of PDoA, respectively. Assuming signals come from far
ﬁeld, the PDoA ifor any tagito the reference tag, say tag 1, can
be derived from the tag separation distance projected to the reader’s
signal direction (i.e., the red line in Figure 4):
i(Y;Z;di) =i 1
=mod(4disin(Y+i
Y) sin(Z+i
Z)
+ i
Tag;2); (2)
wherediis the distance between the ithand reference tag. i
Yand
i
Zare initial angular offsets for tag iand reference tag in the initial
state, which gauge the rotations along YandZaxes respectively
w.r.t. the directions of zero PDoA. They can be calculated from
the array geometrical layout (to be addressed in Sec. 4.3). i
Tagis
56Array 
Layout 
Sensing
Orientation
Spectrum
TrackingPhase 
Calibration
DB
Pattern
Interrogate 
and response
Calibrate 
phase of 
frequency 
hoppingReturn 
tag layout
Return 
orientation①
②③
④Infrastructure Tagyro coreFigure 5: Tagyro’s Architecture and operation workﬂow.
the difference of antenna phase response (cf. Sec. 2.1) between tag
iand the reference tag, which will be calibrated and removed by
our array sensing module (Sec. 4.3.3). Note that PDoA cancels the
unknown phase offset Reader introduced by the reader’s circuits.
In addition, note that the PDoA is irrelevant to the X-axis rotation
in this example setup (Figure 3), since any rotation along X-axis
does not change the distance offset between different tags and the
reader. Therefore, a single reader antenna can only track the array
rotation with 2 Degree-of-Freedoms (DoFs), i.e., along Y and Z
axes. For 3-DoF tracking, Tagyro requires a reader with at least 2
antennas, which will be discussed in Sec. 4.4.
3. Tagyro OPERATION
Tagyro is an orientation sensing system that generalizes the afore-
mentioned ideal PDoA tracking. To use Tagyro, a user needs to at-
tach an array of RFID tags on the target object, following certain
empirical guidelines and without knowing the precise geometrical
relation between tags.
Figure 5 illustrates Tagyro’s ﬂow of operations, comprised of the
following steps: (1)The reader interrogates the tag array following
standard EPC protocol [17], which reads the tags sequentially and
resolves collision via retransmission. Commercial readers (e.g., the
Impinj R420 [18] that we use) can extract many pieces of infor-
mation such as tag ID, phase and Received Signal Strength Indica-
tor (RSSI), which are forwarded to a PC host running Tagyro. (2)
Tagyro’s phase calibration module pre-processes the phase infor-
mation, and removes the phase discontinuity caused by the reader’s
channel hopping. (3)Tagyro’s Array Layout Sensing (ALS) mod-
ule estimates the tag array’s effective layout, which differs from the
geometrical layout due to mutual coupling between tags. (4)Given
the tag array layout, Tagyro measures the tag phase and runs an
orientation-spectrum tracking mechanism to continuously track the
tag array’s orientation.
In what follows, we describe Tagyro’s major design components
and algorithms. We ﬁrst describe how to compute orientation from
the PDoA, assuming the tag array’s layout is known (§ 4.1). Sec-
ond, we explore the main challenges in PDoA and tag layout es-
timation (§ 4.2), particularly caused by the tags’ imperfect radia-
tion pattern. We introduce the ALS algorithm that estimates the
tag array’s effective layout, taking into account the coupling ef-
fect (§ 4.3). Third, we extend the single-array and single-antenna
reader case to dual-array and dual-antenna reader, in order to real-
ize 3-DoF orientation tracking (§ 4.4). We will also discuss phase
calibration and run-time optimization mechanisms that improve the
accuracy and speed of phase reading (§ 4.5 and § 4.6).
4. DESIGN
4.1 Tracking through Orientation Spectrum
We ﬁrst focus on the 2-DoF orientation, i.e., sensing ( Y,Z),
the array’s angular rotation along Y and Z axis, relative to its ini-
tial state. Given the measured PDoA between each tag iand the
-90-60-300306090
0 60 120 180 240 300 360θY (deg.)
θZ (deg.)
00.250.50.751
MagnitudeGrating lobes PeakFigure 6: Example orientation spectrum from measurement.
reference tag, Tagyro estimates the tag array’s orientation by com-
puting an orientation spectrum – a 2D intensity graph in which each
pixel indicates the likelihood of an orientation. We use the phaser-
domain difference between the theoretical PDoA i(computed
from Eq. (2)) and measured PDoA ^ias pixel intensity, i.e.,
I(Y;Z) =jKX
i=1ej(i(Y;Z;di) ^i)j=K (3)
whereKis the tag number in the array. The phaser domain oper-
ation inherently handles the phase aliasing. When the theoretical
PDoA matches the measured value, e.g.,ji ^ij0for all
i, the pixel will have the maximum intensity equal to 1. Otherwise
the pixel intensity will be close to 0. The complexity of comput-
ing the spectrum is O(N2), whereNis the number of values for
each DoF rotation. In Tagyro, we discretize the rotation value Y
andZinto3granularity, resulting in an orientation spectrum with
120120pixels.
The 2-DoF orientation is estimated by ﬁnding the highest peak
in the orientation spectrum:
fY;Zg= arg max
Y2[0;2 );Z2[0;2 )I(Y;Z): (4)
Taking the 4-tag square array in Figure 3 again as an example,
where neighboring tags are separated by the quarter wavelength of
8.2 cm, Figure 6 plots the orientation spectrum when the array ro-
tates at (Y= 0;Z= 80). The highest peak position occurs
exactly at the same orientation. Besides, there are weaker grating
lobes that are caused by the spatial ambiguity effect.
Spatial ambiguity is a well known effect when using multi-antenna
to estimate a signal’s angle of arrival – multiple angles may have
similar likelihood of estimation. To minimize the spatial ambiguity,
antennas need to be separated by less than half-wavelength (=2)
away. For an RFID tag array, the equivalent separation should be
=4 (i.e., 8.2 cm for 915 MHz UHF tags), because the signals tra-
verse a round-trip propagation. Though grating lobes are generally
weaker than the main lobe, they may occasionally obscure the de-
tection of true peak because of residual phase measurement error
and noise in RF channel. To ensure the robustness of Tagyro, in-
stead of picking a single strongest peak, we search for the top three
peaks in the orientation spectrum, and take the one that is closest to
the previous estimation as ﬁnal orientation result. This serves as a
simple moving average outlier ﬁlter.
The above ideal orientation-spectrum tracking model requires
three underlying conditions: (i)a tag backscatters wireless signals
like an isotropic point source, so the signals cover 3D space without
blind direction; (ii)the phase reading of a tag follows a predictable
model over distance (Eq. (1)); (iii)tag array’s relative layout and
the corresponding IDs are known. We next explore the practical
challenges and solutions in Tagyro to meet these conditions.
4.2 Impact of Tag Radiation Pattern
We conduct empirical studies using a COTS RFID platform (Im-
pinj R420 [18]) to better understand the radiation property of RFID
57+X
+Y+Z
Figure 7: Measuring RSS
and phase of a tag rotat-
ing along each axis. The
3D heat map shows radia-
tion pattern of a typical tag.
rTag2Tag1Figure 8: Measuring the PDoA
of a two-tag array. One tag is in
the rotation center and the other
rotates along a circle r= 6cm.
-3-2-1 0 1 2 3
0 60 120 180 240 300 360Phase (rad.)
Rotation (deg.)X
Y
Z
-70-60-50-40-30
060120 180 240 300 360RSS (dBm)
Rotation (deg.)X
Y
Z
Figure 9: Measured phase (left) and RSS (right) of a single tag
rotating along each of the three axes respectively.
tags. Although the ﬁrst two of above basic assumptions (about RSS
and phase) have been applied in previous works to localize tags in
a 2D space [8, 19, 20], we are particularly interested in verifying
whether they still hold under the tag array setup and the implica-
tions for 3D orientation tracking.
4.2.1 Rotation of a Single Tag – Polarity and Blind
Direction Issues
Observation 1 The phase of a single tag is not only determined
by the distance, but also affected by its relative orientation to the
reader antenna.
We ﬁrst reinvestigate the standard phase-distance model (Eq. 1)
under varying tag orientations. We place a slim tag 1.5 m in front
of a ﬂat-panel reader antenna (Figure 7), and rotate the tag center
along each axis. Figure 9 plots the corresponding phase change.
Ideally, the phase should remain constant, if it only depends on the
tag-to-reader distance. Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that the phase shifts
linearly with the rotation along X-axis, and abrupt phase jumps oc-
cur with rotation along Y-axis. The phase only remains unchanged
for the rotation along Z-axis.
This phenomenon is caused by the polarity of RFID antennas.
Due to form-factor constraint, a tag’s antenna is commonly de-
signed as a dipole, which is linear-polarized along the tag body (i.e.,
Z-axis in Figure 7). On the other hand, to ensure they can read tags
from a variety of angles, most RFID readers’ antennas are circular-
polarized [21] – They comprise two perpendicular dipoles, fed with
signals of 90phase difference. When the tag rotates along the
X-axis by 90, the phase of signal received by the tag will change
by
2.Since the signals traverse a round-trip propagation back to
the reader, the corresponding phase shift measured by the reader
doubles. Similarly, the tag phase jump of 2when rotating around
Y-axis by 180is also due to the abrupt change of polarity direc-
tion. We repeat the experiment using other types of tags (Sec. 5)
and observe a similar result.
Implication: Antenna polarity affects the tag phase, and may
confuse the orientation spectrum computation which assumes phase
only depends on the tag-to-reader distance. To isolate the polar-
ity effect, in Tagyro, we enforce a constraint on the tag placement,
called polarity alignment – within a tag array, the tags’ bodies
must be parallel to each other. In this way, polarity introduces the
-4-3-2-1 0 1 2 3 4
0 60 120 180 240 300 360PDoA (rad.)
Rotation (deg.)W/o coupling
W/ coupling
PDoA  
scopeFigure 10: Measured PDoA
value of a two-tag array.
-4-3-2-1 0 1 2 3 4
0 60 120 180 240 300 360PDoA (rad.)
Rotation (deg.)W/o coupling
W/ couplingFigure 11: Simulated PDoA
value of a two-tag array.
same phase shift among all tags during rotation, and does not affect
PDoA.
Observation 2 An RFID tag has non-isotropic radiation: it mainly
backscatters signals surrounding the tag body (XY-plane in Fig-
ure 7), and has blind direction along its radial direction (Z-axis).
Under the same setup as above, Figure 9 plots the RSS with dif-
ferent tag rotations. We see that the tag reﬂects consistently strong
RSS when rotating around X or Z axis. Yet, if it rotates around Y-
axis, the RSS drops signiﬁcantly (by 20 dB) when the tag’s radial
direction points to the reader. The reader cannot reliably decode
the tag’s signal at such blind direction, and hence the phase mea-
surement becomes erroneous.
Implication: The blind direction of an RFID tag limits the range
of orientation that Tagyro can track using a single tag array. To re-
alize 3D orientation sensing, the blind direction of RFID tags must
be compensated by other means.
4.2.2 Rotation of a Tag Array – Coupling Between
Tags
Observation 3 The phase of each tag in the tag array will be af-
fected by neighboring tags through the coupling effect, which devi-
ates actual PDoA from the standard phase-orientation model (Eq. 2).
The coupling effect of RFID tag occurs in near-ﬁeld where sig-
nals backscattered from a responding tag generate resonant voltage
in the antennas of other tags [22]. As a result, besides the signal
from responding tag, other nearby tags will also emit signals, which
further alters the phase received by the reader. We now conduct two
experiments to quantify such effect.
We now create a two-tag array following the polarity alignment
requirement, and measure the PDoA between them (Figure 8). One
tag is in the rotation center and the other rotates along a circle of
radiusr= 6cm. To evaluate the PDoA without coupling effect,
we also collect the phase trace by rotating only one tag (removing
the other), and then compute the PDoA at each of the sampling
locations along the circle.
Figure 10 plots the PDoA for cases with (w) and without (w/o)
coupling effect. We observe that when there is no coupling, the
measured PDoA matches the standard model (Eq. (2)). However,
when two tags rotate together, the PDoA scope, i.e., difference be-
tween maximum and minimum values, has increased signiﬁcantly.
The result shows that PDoA value is scaled by the coupling effect
between tags.
To better understand the root cause of PDoA deviation, we model
the coupling effect of two tags as illustrated in Figure 8. We ﬁrst
consider the case without coupling, the carrier signal backscattered
from Tag1 to the RFID reader is characterized by:
s1=A1exp(j 22d1
) (5)
whereA1denotes the amplitude of received signal and 2d1is the
round-trip distance between tag and reader. Without loss of gen-
erosity, we omit other constant phase offsets caused by tag/reader
58antennas. Eq. (5) is consistent with the standard phase-distance
model (Eq. (1)) – phase is determined by the tag-to-reader distance.
When the coupling effect occurs, RFID reader essentially re-
ceives two copies of signals. One is the original signal coming from
the responding tag, and the other copy is generated by the resonant
voltage and coming from the other tag . Compared to the original
one, the resonant copy experiences certain attenuation and phase
shift, which are uniquely determined by the coupling coefﬁcients
between the two tags. We denote the resonant signal emitted from
Tag2 assc
2, which is given by:
sc
2=Ac
2exp(j 2d1+d2+r
+'c) (6)
whereAc
2and'care the amplitude and phase offset of the resonant
signal.d2andrare the Tag2-to-reader and Tag1-to-Tag2 distances
respectively. In a similar way, when Tag2 is responding, we can
model the signals from Tag1 and Tag2 as sc
1ands2respectively.
When both copies of signals overlap and together reach the RFID
reader, the measured phase value will deviate from the origin one,
and thus the PDoA distorts. We plug in empirical parameters A1=
1,Ac
2= 0:5,'c= 90, and simulate the PDoA of a two-tag array
based on the analytical model. Figure 11 shows that the simulation
result is highly consistent with our experimental measurement.
We further evaluate the extent of coupling effect over tag sepa-
ration distance. We vary the radius rfrom 3cm to18cm, at 3cm
step. We use the PDoA deviation as metric, i.e., the difference of
PDoA scope relative to the case without coupling. Figure 12 shows
thatthe closer two tags are placed to each other, the stronger the
PDoA deviation will be. Recall that computing orientation spec-
trum requires tags to be placed within quarter-wavelength distance
(8.2cm) to minimize the spatial ambiguity (Sec. 4.1). Yet at this
separation, coupling effect is strong and unavoidable.
Implication: The coupling effect, which deviates PDoA value
from the phase-orientation model, will compromise the peak of ori-
entation spectrum and consequently affect the performance of rota-
tion tracking.
In summary, the above experiments reveal that the radiation pat-
tern of RFID tags is far from the ideal model, and may compro-
mise any RSS/phase-based sensing algorithms in 3D space. We
now present the countermeasures in Tagyro.
4.3 Combating Tag Coupling Effect
4.3.1 Effective Distance Between Tags
Since tag coupling distorts the phase and PDoA, a natural coun-
termeasure is to model the coupling effect and compensate the dis-
tortion accordingly. However, such a model must capture the mu-
tual impedance between tags [23], which depends on elusive factors
(e.g., antenna shape and material) that are unlikely to be available
to end-users.
To address this issue, we make an important observation from
Figure 10: under the coupling effect, the scope of PDoA is scaled,
but the relation between rotation angle and PDoA maintains a sim-
ilar trend as the no-coupling case. In other words, we can approx-
imate the end-effect as virtually rescaling the tag separation to an
appropriate value, which we call effective distance. Formally, the
effective distance between the tag iand the reference tag is modeled
as^di, which maximizes the alignment between measured PDoA
and the theoretical value for any given orientation (Y;Z):
f^di;1iKg= arg max
di;1iKjKX
i=1ej(i(Y;Z;di) ^i)j: (7)
To verify this model, we conduct a benchmark experiment in-
volving two tags with a physical distance of 6 cm. We measure
 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5
3 6 9 12 15 18PDoA deviation (rad.)
Tag separation distance (cm)Figure 12: PDoA deviation
over tag separation distance.
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 0  0.5  1  1.5  2CDF
Residual PDoA deviation (rad.)No coupling and
Physical distance model
Coupling and
Physical distance model
Coupling and
Effective distance modelFigure 13: CDF of residual
PDoA deviation. Physical dis-
tance and effective distance
are 6 cm and 9 cm.
the PDoA by rotating the array to three known orientations, and
then ﬁnd the effective distance through Eq. (7). Figure 13 shows
the CDF of PDoA deviation. We can see that, compared with the
physical distance model that does not account for coupling, effec-
tive distance model reduces the maximum PDoA estimation error
from 2 radians to 0.7 radians, and mean to as small as 0.1 radians.
Overall, PDoA deviation is reduced to an extent comparable to the
case without coupling effect (cf. Sec. 4.2.2). Note that, even with-
out coupling, the PDoA model is imperfect and has minor residual
errors due to the multipath and RF noise [8–10, 13]. They will be
incorporated in our system level experiments.
4.3.2 Sensing the Effective Layout of a Tag Array
However, in practice, it is difﬁcult to compute the effective dis-
tance from Eq. (7) for more than two tags due to the huge search
space. More importantly, Eq. (7) requires the knowledge of multi-
ple rotation angles as input, which the user may not even be able to
obtain. In Tagyro, we design an Array Layout Sensing (ALS) algo-
rithm, which can automatically sense the effective distance between
tags, and hence the layout of the entire tag array under coupling,
which we refer to as effective layout.
First, to avoid requiring the knowledge of rotation angle, our key
insight is that the scope of PDoA is determined by the effective dis-
tance of two coupled tags, and it is independent of the array’s ori-
entation. The PDoA value is bounded within [ 4^d
+Tag;4^d
+
 Tag](cf. Eq. (2)). Thus, the effective distance can be determined
by the PDoA scope as:
^d=
4PDoA_scope
2: (8)
To obtain the PDoA_scope, Tagyro requires the user to rotate the
tag array by more than one cycle (360) roughly around each axis.
Meanwhile, it measures the PDoA values and uses the difference
between maximum and minimum PDoA as the PDoA_scope. This
is a simple one-time calibration, needed only when the tag array is
ﬁrst formed.
Second, when measured phase value exceeds 2, the RFID reader
wraps it back to the [0;2]range, which may cause ambiguity in
estimating the max and min PDoA values. We remove the ambi-
guity through phase unwrapping [24]. Since the reader typically
queries the tag at a much higher speed compared to the tag array
rotation, the change between consecutive PDoA values is minor.
Thus, any PDoA change greater than or smaller than indi-
cates the occurrence of phase jumping, which can be removed by
adding/subtracting to the subsequent samples of PDoA values.
Third, computing the orientation spectrum requires the relative
layout of tags instead of their separation. We approach this by
mapping the tags’ pairwise effective distance to the entire tag ar-
ray’s effective layout. This can be formulated as a Classical Multi-
Dimensional Scaling (CMDS) problem [25], which takes a matrix
59Tag iTag j 
(reference)
④Map to effective distance and 
construct the distance matrixTag 1 … Tagi…
Tag 1
(ref.)d11… d1i…
… … … … …
Tag j 
(ref.)dj1… dji…
… … … … …_
①Randomly rotate 
tag array②Compute and unwrap PDoA
for each pair of tags③Track PDoA scopetPDoA
tPDoA
⑤Construct effective geometry 
of RFID tags in 3D space
XYZwrap
unwrap
PDoA scopeFigure 14: Array Layout Sensing (ALS) algorithm to sense the effective geometry of a tag array.
Algorithm 1 Sensing the effective layout of a tag array
1:globalp[1K]  1 Vector of historical phase
2:globala[KK] 0 Matrix of PDoA
3:global[KK]   inf Matrix of maximum PDoA
4:global[KK] inf Matrix of minimum PDoA
5:procedure SenseGeometry( ,) tag ID,phase
6: ifp[]== 1then Initialize new incoming tag
7: [p[];a[]] initialize()
8: end if
9: foreach tag i do Reference tag
10:a[][i] = p[i] Compute PDoA
11:a[i][ ] =p[i] 
12:unwrap(a) Phase unwrapping
13: ifa[][i]>[][i]then Update max PDoA
14: [][i] =a[][i];[i][] =a[i][ ]
15: end if
16: ifa[][i]<[][i]then Update min PDoA
17: [][i] =a[][i];[i][ ] =a[i][ ]
18: end if
19: end for
20: ^d 
4 
2Construct effective distance matrix
21: returnG cmdscale( ^d) CMDS to effective geometry
22: end procedure
that describes dissimilarity between points (e.g., effective distance
in our case) as input, and outputs a coordinate matrix in the geo-
metrical space that minimizes the residual distance error. An ap-
proximate algorithm [26] can solve this problem efﬁciently at com-
plexityO(KlogK)forKtags. We apply the CMDS function
built-in MATLAB which by default projects the Kpoints into a
K-dimensional space. Since tags are located in a 3-D space, the
coordinate values for the higher K 3dimensions are small and
close to zero. So we can take outcomes in the ﬁrst 3 dimensions
as tag coordinates and ignore the others without much loss of accu-
racy. It is worth noting that using other implementations of CMDS
algorithm will not affect the key design of Tagyro.
Figure 14 summarizes the operations of Tagyro’s ALS algorithm:
(i)When the array randomly rotates, ALS computes the PDoA from
a reference tag to every other tags; (ii)The unwrapping operation
removes the aliasing phase; (iii)Then ALS determines the scope of
PDoA by tracking the max and min values of phase, and maps it to
effective distance; (iv)The above steps are repeated for another ref-
erence tag until all pairwise effective distances are obtained, which
together form a matrix; (v)Finally, Tagyro computes the effective
tag layout from the effective distance matrix using the CMDS algo-
rithm.
Algorithm 1 presents our real-time implementation of the ALS
scheme in Tagyro. It takes the tag ID and phaseas input, and
updates the instant layout Gto the user as the reader continuously
queries the tag array. The algorithm can be stopped by user when
the sensed array layout stabilizes.
We emphasize that a tag array’s effective layout may differ from
the geometrical layout. The difference reﬂects the overall impact
of the coupling effect. Figure 14 illustrates the output from a mi-
Reader 
antenna 1
Reader 
antenna 2Array 1Array 2
XYZ
X
YZPrimary 
CoordinateFigure 15: Example of dual-array, dual-antenna reader setup.
crobenchmark experiment, where we run ALS to sense a 4-tag square
array. All 4 tags are physically placed on the X-Y plane, but in the
effective layout, 2 of them are repelled from the plane, which ac-
count for the PDoA deviation due to coupling.
It is worth noting that ALS is a one-time procedure as long as
the geometry layout of the tag array remains unchanged. If the
effective layout can be measured at factory calibration time, then
the ALS procedure can be skipped. In case when the tag-attached
object is not suitable for rotation, the user can hold the RFID reader
and scan around the object to complete the ALS.
4.3.3 Removing Tag’s Initial Phase Offset
The PDoA comprises Tag– the difference of two tags’ initial
phase offset (Sec. 2.2). To ﬁnd out  Tag, recall that the PDoA of
two tags is bounded by [;], where= 4^d
+  Tagand=
4^d
+ Tagare the min and max PDoA values respectively, which
are estimated by the ALS algorithm. Therefore, we can compute
 Tagas follows:
 Tag=+
2: (9)
This offset is a constant value for a pair of tags, which will be
subtracted from the measured PDoA value (modeled by Eq. (2))
before computing the orientation spectrum.
4.4 Dealing with the Blind Direction – Toward
3-DoF Orientation Tracking
The non-isotropic radiation of RFID tags limits the range of ori-
entations that Tagyro can track using a single array. To realize 3-
DoF orientation sensing, we propose a setup using dual-array and
dual-antenna reader. As illustrated in Figure 15, our basic idea is to
deploy another tag array along an orthogonal axis to the ﬁrst one,
so that it can compensate the blind direction, enabling full 2-DoF
tracking. In addition, by deploying an additional reader antenna or-
thogonal to the ﬁrst antenna, we can obtain total 4 DoFs (one being
redundant). Compared to the 2-DoF case, 3-DoF orientation track-
ing requires an additional RFID antenna and tag array. Note that
the dual-array can be attached not only to cuboid-shape objects, but
also other arbitrary shapes (e.g., cylinder), as long as the two arrays
can be arranged along perpendicular directions. We will present
example use cases in Sec. 6.3.
Figure 15 illustrates Tagyro’s algorithmic modules under this
new setup. During the initial setup, Tagyro needs to run the ALS
algorithm for each tag array. At run time, it computes the orienta-
60Array 1
Array 2Antenna 1
Antenna 2R1A1
R1A2
R2A1
R2A2Combo
Validator
Tagyro
CoreOrientation
Spectrum
SynthesisTag physical infoData busSwitchFigure 16: Processing blocks of the dual-array, dual-antenna
reader setup for 3-DoF orientation sensing.
tion spectrum for each combination of tag array and reader-antenna,
referred to as a combo. Meanwhile, it uses a combo validator to de-
termine which combo evades the blind direction problem and pro-
vides a valid (low-noise) PDoA value. Each valid combo can track
orientation along two axes. So, Tagyro runs an orientation spec-
trum synthesis scheme that uniﬁes multiple valid combos’ sensing
results to generate a 3-DoF orientation.
4.4.1 Combo Validator
Recall that, when a tag’s blind direction points near the reader
antenna, the RSS of backscattered signals drops by more than 20
dB, and the phase values become erroneous (Sec. 4.2.2). In ad-
dition, to satisfy the polarity alignment constraint (Sec. 4.2.1), all
tags within an array have the same blind direction. So, as the arrays
rotate, Tagyro’s combo validator tries to exclude those combos in
which the array’s blind direction points to the reader antenna. RSS
may seem a potential indicator – a combo that measures low RSS
is likely to experience the blind direction problem. However, the
absolute RSS depends on the tag-to-antenna distance, which is a
random unknown factor. Therefore, it is impractical to use a ﬁxed
RSS threshold for combo validation.
Our solution builds on the observation that, since the two arrays
are in orthogonal directions, for each antenna, at most one of the
two arrays is in the blind direction. Let 
1and
2denote the
average RSS for tags in Array 1 and 2 respectively. By comparing
their average RSS, Tagyro can determine which array is in the blind
direction:
Blind_Direction_Array =8
><
>:1; 
 2 
1>
2; 
 1 
2>
None; otherwise
i.e., when the RSS of one array is lower than the other by , it is
considered to be blinded. Note that the threshold only depends
on the relative RSS between a valid and blinded array, and is in-
dependent of the tag-to-antenna distance. Based on the empirical
measurement in Figure 9, we set to a conservative value of 5 dB.
4.4.2 3D Orientation Spectrum Synthesis
In the dual-antenna reader setup, we take the ﬁrst antenna’s co-
ordinate system as primary, and convert the estimation from the
second antenna based on their geometrical relation. For exam-
ple, in Figure 15, the orientation spectrum for the second antenna
I(Y;Z)in its own coordinate system becomes I(X;Z)in the
primary coordinate.
Tagyro merges the 2-DoF orientation spectrum (Eq. (3)) from
different combos and produces a uniﬁed 3-DoF estimation. Let
IRiAjdenote the 2-DoF spectrum of combo ij, comprised of Reader
antennaiand Arrayj. Tagyro builds a new orientation spectrum
in 3D space by summing the corresponding pixels across different
combos. The synthesized spectrum for the setup in Figure 15 is:
I(X;Y;Z) =2X
j=1IR1Aj(Y;Z) +2X
j=1IR2Aj(X;Z):
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 0  5  10  15  20  25  30Phase (rad.)
Time (sec.)
Periodicity = 10s
Figure 17: Phase jumping
caused by frequency hopping.
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 0  5  10  15  20  25Phase (rad.)
Distance (cm)Channel 917.25 MHz
Channel 924.75 MHzFigure 18: Phase over dis-
tance for a ﬁxed frequency.
Similar to the 2-DoF case (Sec. 4.1), Tagyro ﬁnds the 3-DoF rota-
tion angles by searching the maximum value in the 3D orientation
spectrum.
4.5 Calibrating Frequency-Hopping Readers
To limit co-channel interference, commercial UHF RFID read-
ers must randomly hop to one of 50 center frequencies within the
902-928 MHz band every 200 ms, following FCC regulation [27].
Frequency hopping will cause phase discontinuity due to the phase
difference of oscillator and non-uniform frequency response of the
tags’ antennas. To our knowledge, this issue has not been examined
experimentally in prior phase-based RFID sensing systems. So we
ﬁrst conduct an empirical study using the Impinj R420 reader [18].
We ﬁrst measure the phase of a stationary tag, which shows huge
phase discontinuity over 30 seconds (Figure 17). When zooming
into a short period, we can see that phase values are piecewise con-
stant with each piece lasting around 200 ms, corresponding the so-
journ time on each frequency. On the other hand, Figure 18 shows
that if we select the phase values from a single frequency and ﬁl-
ter out others, the phase-distance relation still follows the linear
model. These experiments imply that different frequencies induce
different initial phase-offsets at the reader. To overcome the issue,
one may selectively read the phase from one frequency, but this will
signiﬁcantly reduce the phase reading rate, because reader needs 10
seconds to ﬁnish one round of frequency hopping.
In Tagyro, we instead calibrate the phase difference between fre-
quencies, so that the phase output looks like coming from a ﬁxed
frequency. The calibration is done by collecting an initial phase
measurement that takes about 10s for an array before usage. Sup-
pose during calibration, the tag is at distance d0to the reader, now
the phase-distance relation in Eq. (1) also depends on frequency fi,
i.e.,
(fi;d0) =mod(2fid0
c+i;2) (10)
wherecis light speed and idenotes the phase offset introduced at
frequencyfi.
Given the initial phase measurement (fi;d0);8i2[1;50], we
map the phase (fi;d)for arbitrary distance dand frequency fi
to a common frequency fr(default to 915.25 MHz). Substituting
(fi;d0),(fr;d0),(fi;d), and(fr;d)into Eq. (10) and can-
celing the terms iandr, we have:
(fr;d) =mod([(fi;d) (fi;d0)]fr
fi+(fr;d0);2): (11)
Note thatdandd0are not required to be known, because the
phase value(f;d )is always read directly.
4.6 Dealing with Asynchronous Phase Read-
ing
To compute the orientation of a tag array, the reader needs a syn-
chronous phase snapshot of all tags. However, the EPC Gen2 RFID
standard [17] adopts a Framed Slotted Aloha protocol which reads
the tags asynchronously. To address this issue, Tagyro assumes the
61Impinj RFID 
ReaderRFID 
Antenna
Tag Array
RFID Tag sRotator and 
ControllerTagyro GUIObjectFigure 19: Tagyro implementation and software interface.
array’s rotation speed remains similar over consecutive phase read-
ings (typically a few tens of ms), and uses an interpolation method,
which creates an instant phase snapshot for all tags at an interval
of everyTphase readings. In Tagyro, we set Tto the number of
tags in array. Let (ti)denote the phase of a tag at time ti. Tagyro
computes the snapshot phase at time stamp t, given historical phase
readings at time tiandti 1:
(t) =(ti 1) + ((ti) (ti 1))t ti 1
ti ti 1: (12)
Note out that since the interpolated phase value will be eventually
updated by new phase measurement, the error of the interpolation
result will not accumulate or propagate over time.
5. IMPLEMENTATION
Hardware: We implement a prototype of Tagyro using the COTS
RFID reader Impinj R420 [18], which is FCC-compliant and per-
forms frequency hopping within 902:75927:25 MHz. Figure
19 illustrates our hardware components. Two circular polarized an-
tennas are connected to the reader via its two RF ports. Their an-
tenna gain and 3 dB-beamwidth are 5.5 dBi, 7 dBi and 100and
80[28, 29], respectively. We assemble the tag array using three
different types of RFID tags: ALN-9740 [30], SMARTRAC Dog-
Bone [31], and SMARTRAC ShortDipole [32]. They are common
label tag in ﬂat, thin shape and commercially available [33]. Their
maximum reading distance ranges from 15 ft to 20 ft. The reader
interrogates RFID tags and sends query reports, containing infor-
mation of ID, RSS, phase, time stamp and channel, via Ethernet to
a host PC that runs Tagyro.
Software: Tagyro’s software implementation contains three ma-
jor modules: 3D GUI, RFID library and processing algorithms. The
GUI module is developed in C#. It displays the tag array’s effec-
tive layout during initial setup, and instantaneous orientation dur-
ing run-time tracking. The RFID library controls the reader using a
Low-Level Reader Protocol (LLRP) ratiﬁed by EPCglobal. We im-
plement Tagyro’s key processing algorithms (Sec. 4) in MATLAB,
and then recompile them into standalone C libraries (DLL) using
the Code Generation toolbox. The C libraries are imported into C#
program and being invoked in real-time. To start, we ﬁrst run the
frequency calibration module for each array. Then we randomly
rotate the tag array when Tagyro performs ALS to sense the tag ar-
ray’s effective layout. Afterwards, Tagyro can begin its orientation
tracking.
6. EV ALUATION
Methodology: We conduct experiments in an ofﬁce environment
to evaluate the effectiveness of Tagyro’s design components, accu-
racy of orientation sensing, as well as run-time latency. Figure 15
illustrates our experiments’ default setup, where 4 DogBone tags
are attached to a plastic cube forming a square tag array, separatedroughly by quarter-wavelength (i.e., 8.2 cm). Note that since our
ALS algorithm can automatically sense the tag layout, it is not re-
quired to deploy the RFID tags with precise separation. Two reader
antennas are placed 1 m away from the tag array at mutually per-
pendicular directions, both 70 cm above the ground. By default, the
reader uses its maximum transmit power at 32 dBm.
Since we are unaware of any RFID-based system that tracks 3D
orientation of an object, we evaluate accuracy of Tagyro against
ground truth measurement. To obtain the ground-truth orientation,
we mount the tag array (attached to an object) on a mechanical rota-
tor [34] (Figure 19), which is controlled by the PC host to rotate at
full 360-degree at maximum speed 1.71 rad/s with minimum granu-
larity of 1. We ﬁrst rotate the tag array to a known orientation, and
use it as the initial state. Then, the offset between the motor’s rota-
tion angles and initial state is used as the ground-truth orientation.
Since the motor can only rotate in one DoF, we manually change
the pose of the tag array, so that different DoFs can be aligned to
the motor’s rotation axis.
Metrics: To characterize Tagyro’s accuracy, we mainly focus on
angular error, i.e., the deviation of estimated orientation angle from
the ground truth. Since Tagyro mainly relies on the PDoA informa-
tion to pinpoint the tag orientation, in the micro-benchmark exper-
iments we also use the phase error to quantify the effectiveness of
our design.
6.1 Micro Benchmarks
Effectiveness of sensing effective layout. Recall a tag array’s
effective layout sensed by ALS may differ from the physical ge-
ometry, due to tag coupling. Figure 20 illustrates the layout of a
4-tag square array for cases with and without the coupling effect.
Note that in the effective layout, two tags deviate from the Z axis
in order to virtually compensate the coupling effect. Yet, obtaining
the ground truth of coupling effect requires the knowledge of tag’s
physical parameters, e.g.coupling coefﬁcient, which are not easily
accessible in practice. On the other hand, the ALS accuracy will di-
rectly affect the ultimate performance of orientation tracking. Thus,
we leave the evaluation of its effectiveness in the system level tests
(Sec. 6.2).
To validate whether ALS can indeed counteract the coupling ef-
fect, we compute the orientation spectrum with effective layout.
For contrast, we also simulate the oracle case using physical layout
in a non-coupling scenario, which produces the ideal orientation
spectrum. Generally, higher peak intensity means better spectrum
(with higher contrast), because tracking will be more resilient to
noise and spatial ambiguity. Figure 21 plots a snapshot spectrum
in one dimension for zby ﬁxingxandyto zero. When the ar-
ray is orientated at (0;0;195), the orientation spectrum from ALS
has similar peak intensity as oracle. Compared with the case when
the physical layout is used directly, ALS signiﬁcantly improves the
contrast of spectrum. Figure 22 statistically plots the difference of
highest intensity peak in spectrum relative to the oracle. The ALS
algorithm reduces the intensity difference by 5.5 compared with
using physical layout.
Accuracy of selecting the valid combo. In 3D orientation track-
ing, Tagyro’s combo validator is critical in dealing with the blind
direction issue. We verify this mechanism by rotating two arrays
together in 3D space, and inspect if Tagyro can select the correct
tag array. We determine the ground truth by checking if an array’s
blind direction is within 40pointing to the reader antenna.
The experiment results in Figure 23 show that the array indices
selected by Tagyro all match the ground truth. Since occasional
blockage can also cause RSS offset between the two arrays to ex-
ceed the conservative threshold = 5dB (Sec. 4.4), some array
62-10010X-10010
Y-10010
ZPrimitive
ALS
-10 0 10
X-10010Y-10010
Z
-10 0 10
X-10010
Y
-10010ZFigure 20: Effective and physical layout of
the 4-tag array.
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2
060120 180 240 300 360Spectrum intensity
Orientation angle (deg.)Physical layout
ALS
OracleFigure 21: Normalized Spectrum for 4-tag
array.
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 0 0.05  0.1  0.15  0.2  0.25CDF
Spectrum intensity reductionPhysical layout
ALSFigure 22: The CDF of spectrum intensity
difference compared to the oracle.
12
 0  5  10  15  20  25Selected array index
Rotation indexTagyro
Ground truth
Figure 23: Accuracy of selecting the array
in the valid reading zone.
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0 1 2 3 4 5 6Counts (103)
Phase (rad.)W/ calibration
W/o calibrationFigure 24: Histogram of phase distribution
for frequency hopping calibration.
 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
0 20 40 60 80 100Phase deviation (rad.)
SampleW/o snapshot
W/ snapshotFigure 25: Residual phase error of asyn-
chronous phase reading.
Table 1: Query frequency of
each tag in the array (SPS).
Tag # 4 6 8
Avg. spd. 43.1 40.0 37.7
10% spd. 32.1 26.8 25.1
90% spd. 50.0 47.9 46.6Table 2: Efﬁciency of the
tracking algorithm (FPS).
Tag # 4 6 8
1-DoF 4618 3653 3423
2-DoF 205 145 121
3-DoF 111 77 63
indices in the ground truth may not be identiﬁed by Tagyro. How-
ever, this will not cause error because Tagyro can still use the other
array to compute the orientation.
Channel hopping calibration. We next evaluate the impact of
reader’s channel hopping on the phase value by measuring the phase
of astatic tag for 2 minutes. Figure 24 plots the histogram of phase
values. Without calibration, phases are almost evenly distributed
over all possible values with a std. of 1.78-radian. However, the
std. is reduced by 46, down to 0.039-radian after applying the
calibration, which is very close to the noise ﬂoor 0.025-radian.
Effectiveness of the phase snapshot algorithm. Tags in an
array are queried asynchronously by the reader, which makes the
timestamps of phase reading misaligned. To evaluate this impact,
we ﬁrst rotate the tag array over 100 preset orientations and mea-
sure the phase values. Since the tag array is stationary during each
measurement, the phase readings are consistent and used as ground-
truth. Then we measure the phase while continuously rotating the
array through these preset orientations. We observe that the phase
error is substantially reduced after applying the phase snapshot al-
gorithm (Figure 25). Mean error drops from 0.084 radian to 0.026
radian. We believe the reduction can be larger for a higher rota-
tion speed. Note that the error can occasionally be magniﬁed by the
phase snapshot due to unexpected phase deviation, e.g.noise. But
they will have marginal impact on orientation tracking since the oc-
casionally magniﬁed error does not accumulate or propagate over
time.
Interrogating speed of tag array. For real-time orientation track-
ing, one key question is: how fast can the RFID reader query thetag array? The query speed determines how frequent Tagyro can
update the orientation estimation. We evaluate the query speed by
interrogating different sizes of tag arrays. The reader uses its de-
fault AutoSet Dense mode, which automatically adjusts its MAC-
layer parameters to maximize the tag query speed. Table 1 summa-
rizes the CDF of update frequency for a two-minute measurement
when the array rotates at the maximum speed. Although the update
frequency slightly decreases as we increase the array size, on aver-
age Tagyro can achieve 37.7 samples per second (SPS) even for the
8-tag array.
Efﬁciency of tracking algorithm. We further examine the real-
time processing speed of our Tagyro implementation. We ﬁrst col-
lect a 2-minute trace data of the tag array’s phase and then replay
the trace in our Tagyro program. In this way, we can evaluate the ef-
ﬁciency of our orientation tracking algorithm independently of the
reader’s query speed. We run Tagyro on a i7-4770 PC utilizing one
CPU core. Table 2 plots the frame rate (number of orientation sam-
ple outputs per second). Tagyro can maintain an average processing
rate of 3500 FPS, 144.8 FPS and 76.7 FPS, for 1-DoF, 2-DoF and
3-DoF orientation tracking, respectively. The main bottleneck of
Tagyro’s tracking efﬁciency lies in the RFID reader’s query speed
(Table 1) which is much lower than the processing speed of Tagyro.
6.2 System Level Tests
We proceed to evaluate Tagyro’s overall performance in tracking
3D orientation under various practical settings.
Accuracy of 3D orientation tracking. We ﬁrst evaluate the
accuracy of orientation tracking under different DoFs: (i) 1-DoF:
tracking Z-axis rotation using a single tag array and single-antenna
reader; (ii) 2-DoF: tracking Y and Z axis rotations using dual-array
and single-antenna reader; (iii) 3-DoF: using the dual-array, dual-
antenna reader setup as in Figure 15. Our experimental results
(Figure 26) show that for both 1-DoF and 2-DoF, the average (90-
percentile) tracking error is about 4(8). 2-DoF case has a similar
accuracy with the 1-DoF since each of the two arrays independently
630 2 4 6 8 10
1-DoF 2-DoF 3-DoFAngular error (deg.)X
 Y
 ZFigure 26: Accuracy vs. DoF. Error bar
shows the 90therror.
060120180240300360
0 1 2 3 4 5Orientation (rad.)
Time (sec.)Estimated
Ground truthFigure 27: Estimation and ground-true
for 1-DoF rotation.
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 0  5  10  15  20CDF
Angular error (deg.)2-tag linear
3-tag linear
4-tag linear
4-tag rect.
6-tag rect.
8-tag rect.Figure 28: The CDF of orientation error
vs. size of tag array.
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
2-Tag 4-Tag 6-Tag 8-TagAngular error (deg.)Stationary
Dynamic
Figure 29: Orientation error under sur-
rounding human activity. Error bar
shows the 90therror.
 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
11.25 1.51.75 22.25 2.5 2.75Angular error (deg.)
Distance (m)Figure 30: Orientation error over tag-to-
antenna distance.
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14CDF
Angular error (deg.)Baseline.
Card box
Plastic Board
Wooden WallFigure 31: The CDF of orientation error
under blockage.
tracks one DoF. Notably, the average orientation error of Z-axis is
much smaller (2:2) in 3-DoF case, because both of the reader’s
antennas are outside the blind direction. Tagyro’s orientation spec-
trum synthesis can effectively unify the extra spatial diversity to
produce a better estimate. Figure 27 plots 5 overlapped example
tracking results for 360rotation in 1-DoF. The ﬁgure depicts the
orientation estimation of a tag array rotating at a constant speed and
the ground truth value over the time, which shows that the estimated
angle is highly consistent with the ground truth at every time stamp.
Impact of array size. We next vary the number of tags in array
from 2 to 8 and evaluate how it affects the accuracy of orientation
tracking. Figure 2 shows the tag arrays’ physical layouts. Figure 28
plots the CDF of angular error in 1-DoF tracking, which shows that
a larger tag array can effectively improve accuracy. The average
error is reduced from 4.80for 2-tag array to 1.98for 8-tag ar-
ray. Moreover, the 90-percentile error is also reduced from 9.71to
3.60. The improvement gently diminishes as the size of tag array
increases. In practice, an array of 46 tags may make a good bal-
ance between accuracy vs. form factor. Using high-frequency tags
(e.g., millimeter-wave) may signiﬁcantly reduce the form factor due
to shorter wave length and smaller antenna size. But this is beyond
the scope of our work.
Impact of environmental dynamics. Like all other phase-based
RFID sensing systems [8–10, 13], estimated phase value in Tagyro
is subject to the channel noise and inﬂuenced by multipath envi-
ronment. To evaluate their impacts, we measure the jitter of esti-
mated orientation, while ﬁxing the tags so that any jitter can be only
caused by RF channel ﬂuctuation. Figure 29 compares the angular
jitter in a stationary environment with that where a human randomly
walks around the reader and tags. The average jitter caused by the
channel noise itself is small and typically less than 1. On the other
hand, the estimated orientation can deviate by 6:5when there is
signiﬁcant human movement. This is mainly attributed to the in-
tentionally created variation of multipath reﬂections. Fortunately,
a larger tag array can make Tagyro more resilient to environmen-
tal dynamics — with an 8-tag array, the angular jitter is reduced to
about 1.Impact of tag-to-antenna distance. Typical RFID systems have
a maximum reading range of 46 m [35]. Longer distance results
in weaker signals, hence more noisy phase reading. To understand
its impact on the orientation accuracy, we vary the tag-to-antenna
distance from 1 m to 2.75 m. Figure 30 shows that the average an-
gular error gently increases from 2.09to 9.32, with a maximum
working distance about 3m in our setup. A closer examination re-
veals that the RSS drops signiﬁcantly over distance. The lowest
RSS across rotation angles decreases by more than 21 dBm, from
-49 dBm at 1m to -70 dBm at 2 m. Since the sensitivity of the Im-
pinj R420 reader is -82 dBm [18], its measured phase value starts
to deviate from the phase-distance model (Sec. 2.1) when distance
goes beyond 2 m. On the other hand, backscattered data bits can be
decoded at a further distance because RFID adopts Amplitude-Shift
Keying (ASK) modulation that is insensitive to the phase deviation.
By deploying more RFID antennas, Tagyro can potentially cover a
wider working area, which we will leave for our future work.
Under blockage. Tagyro’s usage scenarios may involve NLOS
environment, e.g., in a supply chain, where the object (and tag ar-
ray) may be placed inside a card box (Figure 1). We mimic such
NLOS cases by blocking the LOS between the tag array and reader
using different materials: card box, plastic board and wooden wall,
with thickness of 5 mm, 10 mm and 30 mm, respectively. Fig-
ure 31 shows that blockage has marginal impact on Tagyro’s ori-
entation tracking. The wooden wall slightly reduces the accuracy
because its thickness attenuates the backscattered signal strength,
similarly to increasing tag-to-reader distance. The experiment ver-
iﬁes that Tagyro can track orientation in NLOS scenarios where
camera-based approaches [36] will fail.
Latency of rotation response. In the implementation, we buffer
multiple latest phase values for algorithm processing and adopt a
Kalman ﬁlter to reduce noise in orientation estimation. They will
incur response latency in the tracking output. To evaluate the la-
tency, we rotate the tag array by 90and simultaneously measure
the time it takes for the estimated orientation to be less than 5close
to the ground truth. Figure 32 plots the CDF of response latency
from 50 measurements. The average values of response latency are
640 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
400 500 600 700 800CDF
Response latency (ms)4 tags
6 tags
8 tagsFigure 32: Latency of rotation
response.
024681012
 5 10 15 20 25 30 35Face-up number 
Toss indexGround truth EstimatedFigure 33: Detecting which
side of the dice faces up.
0.61s and 0.71s for 4-tag and 6-tag arrays respectively, which are
sufﬁcient for most application scenarios that do not have stringent
timing constraint. Besides, the latency can be further reduced by
using high-speed RFID readers.
6.3 Case Study
In this section, we apply Tagyro in two case studies: a gaming
scenario where Tagyro detects the orientation of a 12-side dice, and
a smart home scenario where Tagyro monitors the rotation of the
door and consumption of roll tissue.
Tracking a 12-side dice. To detect which side of a ball-like dice
faces up, we need at least two DoFs – the horizontal rotation does
not matter because it will not change the face-up number. Thus, we
setup one reader in the ceiling, which projects signals toward the
ground and attach two tag arrays to the dice in mutually perpendicu-
lar directions (Figure 34). We randomly toss the dice and record the
estimated and ground-truth number that faces up. Figure 33 shows
that Tagyro correctly identiﬁes 33 out of 36 numbers, achieving
91.7% accuracy. The tracking accuracy of the 12-side dice is lower
than the 3D case (Figure 26) due to two factors. First, the shape
of dodecahedron does not allow us to attach tags completely fol-
lowing the constraint of polarity alignment (Section 4.2.1), which
reduces the accuracy of combo validation (Section 4.4.1). Second,
the two closely-placed tag arrays will create an inter-array coupling
effect. Tagyro performs ALS independently for each array, which
handles the intra-array coupling effect. Yet, it is unable to sense the
inter-array coupling effect. On the other hand, Tagyro cannot per-
form a joint ALS for both arrays because their polarity directions
are orthogonal. One approach to mitigate the inter-array coupling
effect is to separate the two arrays by a distance of greater than half-
wavelength (Figure 12), such as attaching tags to different edges of
the box (Figure 15).
Monitoring smart home. In the smart home scenario, Tagyro
can monitor the status of daily objects, e.g., whether the door is
open or close, which direction a rolling chair (and a seated human)
is facing, and how much roll tissue has been consumed. Many such
problems can be addressed by sensing the rotation/orientation of
the passive objects. Here we showcase the door and roll tissue sce-
narios. Since both of them have ﬁxed rotation axes, (i.e., rotation is
restricted to 1-DoF), we attach a 4-tag array on each (Figure 1), and
use a single-antenna reader as monitor. Figure 35(a) plots the ac-
cumulated rounds of rotations for a roll tissue, which unveils ﬁne-
grained information of the consumption over time. Figure 35(b)
shows tracking result for a door, which measures not only its open-
ing angle, but also the time duration when it stays open/close. These
case studies also demonstrate Tagyro can be applied to a wide range
of objects with different shapes.
Though these detection tasks may be also addressed by simple
mechanical or IR sensor, Tagyro has several unique advantages over
them. (i)Fine-grained rotation trajectory. Tagyro not only tells if
the door opens or closes, but also the degree of opening, which is
useful for applications, such as to determine if a robot or cargo can
Figure 34: Eight tags are at-
tached to the surface of a 12-
side dice.
02468
 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80RoundsTime
(sec.) (a)
0306090120
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9Angle (deg.)Time
(min.)Open
Close
(b)Figure 35: Detecting (a) usage of
roll tissue and (b) open/close sta-
tus of the door.
go through the door. (ii)Ad-hoc installation. Tagyro can instantly
enable orientation tracking by attaching multiple tags to the target
object, which does not involve heavy mechanical installation or al-
tering the physical structure. (iii)Maintenance free. The batteryless
RFID tags are continuously power by the RFID reader without the
need for battery replacement.
7. DISCUSSION
Multipath Effects: Besides RFID tags, signals from the RFID
reader may be reﬂected by other objects in the environment. Re-
ﬂections from stationary objects do not disturb the RFID phase
measurement [13], and hence will not affect Tagyro’s performance.
RFID reader estimates phase based on the modulated signals back-
scattered from the tag. Any signals reﬂected from static objects
are unmodulated and are already removed by the reader’s built-in
high-pass ﬁlter.
Yet, multipath reﬂections from moving objects, e.g., human walk-
ing, may cause some adversary effects. In such cases, the reﬂected
signals are dynamic, and thus may not be effectively removed by
the high-pass ﬁlter. Fortunately, this adversary impact can be effec-
tively alleviated by increasing the tag number in the array (Figure
29).
Coupling Effect Caused by Surrounding Metallic Objects:
The coupling effect occurs not only among RFID tags, but also
between the tag and surrounding metallic materials in the environ-
ment, which we call static anddynamic coupling, respectively. The
ALS algorithm is designed primarily to address the static coupling
issue. The dynamic coupling cannot be effectively captured, be-
cause the metallic object does not rotate along with the tag array –
when the tag array rotates, their coupling coefﬁcients would change
arbitrarily. Addressing the impact of dynamic coupling effect from
surrounding metallic objects on the RFID phase measurement is
still an open challenge. Fortunately, our observation (Figure 12)
demonstrates that as long as the metallic object is not very close
to the tag, e.g., >the half wavelength (
216cm ), the coupling
effect between them will almost vanish and will not affect the ac-
curacy of phase measurement.
Size of Tag Array: Given the relatively large size of commodity
UHF RFID tags, it may not always be feasible to attach multiple
tags to an object of small size. The size of tag array is primarily
limited by the physical constraint, where the antenna size and sep-
aration have to match the wavelength of wireless frequency. As the
RFID technology matures at higher frequency, e.g., 60 GHz, the
size of tag array can be signiﬁcantly reduced [37, 38], much like a
ﬁnger nail. A smaller tag size will extends Tagyro towards more
ubiquitous Internet-of-Things applications.
Tracking Orientation of Multiple Objects: When multiple ob-
jects exist in the same vicinity, Tagyro can track them indepen-
dently given the tag IDs associated with each object. This is a
huge advantage over vision-based approaches [3–7] which are eas-
65ily confused by background and occlusion effects. Yet, the per-
formance of Tagyro may be compromised due to the limited total
query speed of the RFID reader, where the speed for each tag is
reduced.
8. RELATED WORK
Our work is most closely related with prior art in the following
domains:
Sensor-equipped device. The most straightforward approach to
sense orientation is to use active sensors, e.g., magnetometer, gy-
roscope or accelerometer. Acube [15] combines these active sen-
sors to estimate the orientation of a smartphone that is used for
indoor localization and tracking. In industry setting [39], orienta-
tion sensors are deployed to guide robot arms to pick up objects.
Active sensors are accurate but power hungry, and need frequent
maintenance (e.g., battery replacement or charging). RFID tags are
batteryless and ideal for objects that cannot afford frequent main-
tenance. RFID-Die [40] and WISP [41] use customized RFID tags
with embedded motion sensors that harvest energy from RF signals.
The power draw of sensors signiﬁcantly reduces the tags’ working
range (down to 8 cm [40]) and reduces the duty cycle (e.g., one
sensing for every two-second charging [42]). In contrast, Tagyro
uses COTS passive RFID tags, with a typical working range of
around 3 m and sampling rate of 37.7 samples/second. Owing to
low-cost of RFID tags (10 cents each [43]), Tagyro is readily usable
in massive Internet-of-Things applications. In addition, mid-end
smartphones with RFID readers are already available, which can
bring Tagyro to home and in-situ usage. The Cricket Compass [44]
tracks the orientation of a mobile device based on the distance dif-
ference of arrival between multiple pairs of ultrasonic transceivers.
Although the high-level principle share similarities, Tagyro’s RFID
tag array tracking entails a unique set of challenges while bringing
salient properties in terms of precision, cost, and energy efﬁciency.
Image-based orientation detection. Detecting the orientation
of object is a general problem in computer vision [3–7]. Hinter-
stoisser et al. [3] proposed a template matching method to detect the
tilt angle of objects in the image. Image-based approach is also used
to detect human face, head and gaze orientation [45, 46]. Saxena et
al.[4,36] and Shimizu et al. [7] applied a pattern matching method
to estimate the 3D orientation of objects in the image, which can
guide robotic arms’ grasping action. However, such image-based
approaches only work in line-of-sight (LOS). They are very sensi-
tive to lighting condition and fail even under partial occlusion by a
paper box. On the other hand, Tagyro can accurately track object
orientation even if the tags are occluded from the reader’s LOS.
RFID tilt sensing. There has been preliminary work in RFID-
based tilt sensing, which puts either the reader or tags on the object.
Han et al. [47,48] used a site-survey approach to determine the po-
sition and orientation of a target (e.g. robot and chair) in a 2D space.
However, they need to install the reader on the target, and require a
dense deployment of RFID tags to cover the ﬂoor of interest. RF-
Compass [12] uses a 2D-plane partitioning method to navigate a
robot to gradually converge towards an object’s direction, but can-
not estimate the object’s instantaneous 3D orientation. Krigslund
et al. [14, 49, 50] estimate the 1D orientation of an RFID tag by
tracking the RSS ﬂuctuation based on the principle of antenna po-
larity. Due to polarity mismatch, RSS decreases proportionally to
the angular misalignment between the reader and the tag. However,
the RSS is easily affected by distance and environment dynamics,
and the polarity-based approach has 90ambiguity in orientation
estimation. Tagyro represents the ﬁrst phase-based method to sense
tag orientation without ambiguities, and in 3D space.
RF-based localization. RFID tag localization has been exten-sively studied recently [8, 10, 47, 48, 51, 52]. The state-of-the-art
techniques, e.g., Tagoram [8] and PinIt [52], can already locate the
tag’s position at a cm-level or mm-level accuracy. On the other
hand, estimating the orientation of RFID tag is a relatively new area
that has not been well explored yet. The basic idea behind Tagyro’s
tag array approach shares similar spirit with antenna-array based
radio localization [53], which can track the relative angle between
a multi-antenna receiver and an access point on the same 2D space.
However, the unique properties of RFID, e.g., tag coupling and non-
isotropic radiation, bring unprecedented challenges to Tagyro.
One may think of applying them to estimate the object orienta-
tion: by attaching two tags to different parts of the object, its ori-
entation can be derived from the estimated locations of tags. How-
ever, this approach has several limitations. First, existing schemes
only address the 2D localization problem [47, 48, 51]. The 2D po-
sition (on a plane) limits the orientation estimation to only 1 DoF.
Second, most state-of-the-art localization schemes have 1020 cm
errors [10]. They are unable to differentiate the position of two
closely-placed tags, and thus cannot give precise orientation esti-
mation. Although Tagoram [8] can estimate tag position at cm-level
accuracy, it requires multiple readers that are precisely deployed at
dedicated positions, which is not suitable for ad-hoc scenarios like
smart home or mobile gaming. STPP [11] can estimate the rela-
tive position for closely-separated tags, but it can only discriminate
the left/right/up/down ordering. Furthermore, the non-ideal radia-
tion of RFID signal (Sec. 4.2) invalidates the basic assumption that
the phase changes linearly over distance, which requires us to re-
think the effectiveness of existing phase-based RFID localization
techniques [8, 11] when working in the 3D space.
RFID radiation pattern. Existing electromagnetic research has
studied the imperfection of RFID tag radiation pattern. Zhang et
al.[54] used two dipole antennas in orthogonal directions to achieve
full RSS coverage over 3D space. Tagyro adopts a similar idea
to address the blind direction issue, which deploys two tag arrays
in perpendicular directions (Sec. 4.2). Yet, Tagyro addresses the
more critical problem of polarity-induced phase-shifting, through
adaptive array selection and polarity alignment. Bolotnyy et al.
[55] studied the tag readability issue caused by coupling effect in
a multi-tag RFID system. To our knowledge, Tagyro is the ﬁrst to
evaluate the impact of coupling effect on the phase of RFID tag
array, and to counteract the effect by using the layout sensing tech-
nique.
9. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose an RFID-based system to track the ori-
entation of a batteryless object. By forming an array using multiple
tags, Tagyro exploits their phase difference of arrival to ﬁnd out
the object orientation. Novel processing algorithms are proposed
to address challenging issues such as coupling effect, which are
raised in the tag-array RFID system. Tagyro is built upon COTS
RFID reader and tags. We conduct system-level experiments and
two case studies, which show that Tagyro can achieve high accu-
racy in orientation tracking. Tagyro represents the ﬁrst study of an
RFID-based 3D orientation tracking system, which can be applied
to many practical scenarios including but not limit to smart home
and mobile gaming.
Acknowledgements
We appreciate the insightful feedback from the anonymous review-
ers who helped improving this work. This project is supported in
part by the NSF under Grant CNS-1506657, CNS-1518728, CNS-
1343363, and CNS-1350039.
6610. REFERENCES
[1] H. Wang, M. Farid, S. Sen, M. Youssef, A. Elgohary, and
R. R. Choudhury, “No Need to War-drive: Unsupervised
Indoor Localization,” in Proceedings of ACM MobiSys, 2012.
[2] S. Agrawal, I. Constandache, S. Gaonkar, R. Roy Choudhury,
K. Caves, and F. DeRuyter, “Using Mobile Phones to Write
in Air,” in Proc. of ACM MobiSys, 2011.
[3] S. Hinterstoisser, V . Lepetit, S. Ilic, P. Fua, and N. Navab,
“Dominant Orientation Templates for Real-Time Detection
of Texture-less Objects,” 2010.
[4] A. Saxena, J. Driemeyer, and A. Y . Ng, “Learning 3-D Object
Orientation From Images,” in Robotics and Automation,
2009. ICRA’09. IEEE International Conference on, 2009.
[5] A. Collet, D. Berenson, S. S. Srinivasa, and D. Ferguson,
“Object Recognition and Full Pose Registration from a Single
Image for Robotic Manipulation,” in IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2009.
[6] W. Wan, F. Lu, Z. Wu, and K. Harada, “Teaching Robots to
Do Object Assembly Using Multi-Modal 3D Vision,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1601.06473, 2016.
[7] S. Shimizu, T. Nagahashi, and H. Fujiyoshi, “Robust and
Accurate Detection of Object Orientation and ID Without
Color Segmentation,” in RoboCup 2005: Robot Soccer World
Cup IX, 2005.
[8] L. Yang, Y . Chen, X.-Y . Li, C. Xiao, M. Li, and Y . Liu,
“Tagoram: Real-Time Tracking of Mobile RFID Tags to
High Precision Using COTS Devices,” in ACM MobiCom,
2014.
[9] T. Liu, L. Yang, Q. Lin, Y . Guo, and Y . Liu, “Anchor-Free
Backscatter Positioning for RFID Tags With High
Accuracy,” in Proc. of IEEE INFOCOM, 2014.
[10] J. Wang, D. Vasisht, and D. Katabi, “Rf-iDraw: Virtual
Touch Screen in the Air Using RF Signals,” in ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 2014.
[11] L. Shangguan, Z. Yang, A. X. Liu, Z. Zhou, and Y . Liu,
“Relative Localization of RFID Tags Using Spatial-Temporal
Phase Proﬁling,” in Proc. of USENIX NSDI, 2015.
[12] J. Wang, F. Adib, R. Knepper, D. Katabi, and D. Rus,
“RF-Compass: Robot Object Manipulation Using RFIDs,” in
Proc. of ACM MobiCom, 2013.
[13] P. V . Nikitin, R. Martinez, S. Ramamurthy, H. Leland,
G. Spiess, and K. Rao, “Phase Based Spatial Identiﬁcation of
UHF RFID Tags,” in RFID, 2010 IEEE International
Conference on, 2010.
[14] R. Krigslund, P. Popovski, G. F. Pedersen, and K. Bank,
“Potential of RFID Systems to Detect Object Orientation,” in
IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC),
2011.
[15] P. Zhou, M. Li, and G. Shen, “Use It Free: Instantly Knowing
Your Phone Attitude,” in Proc. of ACM MobiCom, 2014.
[16] “Low Level User Data Support,” Speedway Revolution
Reader Application Note, 2013.
[17] M. Roberti, “EPCglobal Ratiﬁes Gen 2 Standard,” RFID
Journal, 2004.
[18] “Impinj RFID Reader.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.impinj.com/products/readers/
[19] L. Shangguan, Z. Yang, L. Alex, and Y . Liu, “Relative
Localization of RFID Tags Using Spatial-Temporal Phase
Proﬁling,” in USENIX NSDI, 2015.
[20] T. Liu, L. Yang, Q. Lin, Y . Guo, and Y . Liu, “Anchor-Free
Backscatter Positioning for RFID Tags With HighAccuracy,” in Proc. of IEEE INFOCOM, 2014.
[21] H. Lehpamer, RFID Design Principles. Artech House,
2012.
[22] H. S. Lui, “Mutual Coupling in Antenna Arrays,” 2010.
[23] H. Hui and S. Lu, “Receiving Mutual Impedance between
Two Parallel Dipole Antennas,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
TENCON, 2006.
[24] K. Abbas, “A New Recurrent Approach for Phase
Unwrapping,” International Journal of Applied Science and
Engineering, 2005.
[25] I. Borg and P. J. Groenen, Modern Multidimensional Scaling:
Theory and Applications. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2005.
[26] T. Yang, J. Liu, L. McMillan, and W. Wang, “A Fast
Approximation to Multidimensional Scaling,” in IEEE
workshop on Computation Intensive Methods for Computer
Vision, 2006.
[27] M. Buettner and D. Wetherall, “A Gen 2 RFID Monitor
Based on the USRP,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer
Communication Review, 2010.
[28] “Patch Antenna (Circular) A0003-02,”
http://www.atlasrﬁdstore.com/invengo-xc-1003-uhf-rﬁd-
mobile-phone,
2015.
[29] “Mini RFID Panel Antenna S9025P,”
http://www.es.co.th/Schemetic/PDF/S9025PR-
S9025PL.PDF,
2009.
[30] “ALN-9740 Squiggle Inlay,”
http://www.alientechnology.com/wp-content/uploads/Alien-
Technology-Higgs-4-ALN-9740-Squiggle.pdf.
[31] “Dogbone - Smartrac,” https://www.smartrac-
group.com/ﬁles/content/Products_Services/PDF/
DogBone_M4.pdf.
[32] “ShortDipole - Smartrac,” https://www.smartrac-
group.com/ﬁles/content/Products_Services/PDF/
ShortDipole_M5.pdf.
[33] “RFID Tag Type Options,”
http://www.idtechex.com/research/articles/rﬁd_tag_type
_options_00000041.asp.
[34] “Axis360 Motion Control System,”
http://cinetics.com/two-axis360/.
[35] R. Want, “An Introduction to RFID Technology,” Pervasive
Computing, IEEE, 2006.
[36] A. Saxena, J. Driemeyer, and A. Y . Ng, “Robotic Grasping of
Novel Objects Using Vision,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, 2008.
[37] S. Pellerano, J. Alvarado, and Y . Palaskas, “A mm-wave
power-harvesting rﬁd tag in 90 nm cmos,” IEEE Journal of
Solid-State Circuits, 2010.
[38] P. Pursula, T. Karttaavi, M. Kantanen, A. Lamminen,
J. Holmberg, M. Lahdes, I. Marttila, M. Lahti, A. Luukanen,
and T. Vaha-Heikkila, “60-ghz millimeter-wave identiﬁcation
reader on 90-nm cmos and ltcc,” IEEE Transactions on
Microwave Theory and Techniques, 2011.
[39] G. Fortino and P. Trunﬁo, “Internet of Things Based on
Smart Objects,” Fortino & P . Trunﬁo, eds., Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2014.
[40] L. Büthe, M. Hardegger, P. Brülisauer, and G. Tröster,
“RFID-Die: Battery-Free Orientation Sensing Using an
Array of Passive Tilt Switches,” in Proceedings of ACM
67International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing: Adjunct Publication, 2014.
[41] D. J. Yeager, A. P. Sample, J. R. Smith, and J. R. Smith,
“Wisp: A Passively Powered UHF RFID Tag With Sensing
and Computation,” RFID Handbook: Applications,
Technology, Security, and Privacy, 2008.
[42] J. R. Smith, A. P. Sample, P. S. Powledge, S. Roy, and
A. Mamishev, “A Wirelessly-Powered Platform for Sensing
and Computation,” in ACM UbiComp, 2006.
[43] X. Zhu, S. K. Mukhopadhyay, and H. Kurata, “A Review of
RFID Technology and Its Managerial Applications in
Different Industries,” Journal of Engineering and Technology
Management, 2012.
[44] N. B. Priyantha, A. K. Miu, H. Balakrishnan, and S. Teller,
“The Cricket Compass for Context-Aware Mobile
Applications,” in Proc. of ACM MobiCom, 2001.
[45] C.-C. Chang and H. Aghajan, “Collaborative Face
Orientation Detection in Wireless Image Sensor Networks,”
inProceedings of ACM SenSys Workshop on Distributed
Smart Cameras, 2006.
[46] J. Y . Kaminski, J. Teicher, and A. Shavit, “Head Orientation
and Gaze Detection from a Single Image,” in International
conference of computer vision theory and applications, 2006.
[47] S. Han, H. Lim, and J. Lee, “An Efﬁcient Localization
Scheme for a Differential-Driving Mobile Robot Based on
RFID System,” Industrial Electronics, IEEE Transactions on,
2007.
[48] A. A. N. Shirehjini, A. Yassine, and S. Shirmohammadi, “An
RFID-Based Position and Orientation Measurement Systemfor Mobile Objects in Intelligent Environments,”
Instrumentation and Measurement, IEEE Transactions on,
2012.
[49] R. Krigslund, S. Dosen, P. Popovski, J. L. Dideriksen, G. F.
Pedersen, and D. Farina, “A novel technology for motion
capture using passive uhf rﬁd tags,” IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering, 2013.
[50] G. Gupta, B. P. Singh, A. Bal, D. Kedia, and A. Harish,
“Orientation detection using passive uhf rﬁd technology
[education column],” IEEE Antennas and Propagation
Magazine, 2014.
[51] S. Hinske, “Determining the Position and Orientation of
Multi-Tagged Objects Using RFID Technology,” in IEEE
Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops, 2007.
[52] J. Wang and D. Katabi, “Dude, where’s my card?: RFID
Positioning That Works With Multipath and Non-Line of
Sight,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review,
2013.
[53] J. Xiong and K. Jamieson, “ArrayTrack: A Fine-Grained
Indoor Location System,” in Presented as part of the 10th
USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation (NSDI 13), 2013.
[54] Y . Zhang, B. Wang, H. Zhang, and W. Kong, “True 3D
Antenna for UHF RFID Application,” in 6th Asia Symposium
on Quality Electronic Design (ASQED), 2015.
[55] L. Bolotnyy, S. Krize, and G. Robins, “The Practicality of
Multi-Tag RFID Systems,” in IWRT, 2007.
68