“I Never Gave Up ”∗ 
Engagement with Playable Characters and Esports Players of Overwatch   
Tanja Välisalo  
Department of Music, Art and Culture Studies  
University of Jyvaskyla  
Jyvaskyla, Finland  
tanja.valisalo@jyu.fi  Maria Ruotsalainen  
Department of Music, Art and Culture Studies  
University of Jyvaskyla  
Jyvaskyla, Finland  
maria.a.t.ruotsalainen@jyu.fi
 
ABSTRACT  
Esports phenomena have grown rapidly in recent years, and so has 
research on the topic. Some of the research has also addressed 
esports fandom (see e.g. Taylor 2012). Nevertheless, studies 
comparing and contrasting how players and fans engage with the 
game and the esports based on that game are scarce. This study 
compares and co ntrasts how players and fans engage with playable 
game characters and esports players. The paper draws on previous 
research in fan studies, sports fandom and esports to examine the 
relationships of players and fans of the videogame Overwatch  
(Blizzard Ente rtainment 2016) with the fictional heroes of the game 
as well as with their favorite professional players in the newly 
started Overwatch League. We analyse how these relationships are 
articulated by fans and players, and pay attention to emerging 
similarit ies and differences.  
The findings show that personality is deemed important for 
engagement with both, game characters and esports players. In 
addition,  gender and sexual orientation emerged as important 
factors. By contrast, nationality was deemed importa nt for 
engagement with esports players, but not with player characters. 
Further research should concentrate on the connections between 
esports and identity politics, as well as player characters and 
identity construction.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3337722.3337769  
CCS CONCEPTS  
• Information systems~Massively multiplayer online games  
• Social and professional topics~Gender    • Social and professional 
topics~ Sexual orientation  
KEYWORDS  
Game Characters, Esports, Esports Players, Fans, Overwatch  ACM Reference format:  
Tanja Välisalo and Maria Ruotsalainen . 2019. “I Never Gave Up ”∗ 
Engagement with Playable Characters and Esports Players of Overwatch . 
In Proceedings of FDG '19, August 26–30, 2019, San Luis Obispo, CA, 
USA, 6 pages . https://doi.org/10.1145/3337722.3337769  
1 Introduction  
Esports have been on the rise in the past years and have also caught 
the attention of the academia. Esports have, for example, been 
studied as a form of media sports as well as a growing new 
business, and additionally, have  been used as an opportunity to 
study high -achieving players. Some of the research has also 
addressed esports fandom (see e.g. Taylor 2012). Nevertheless, 
studies examining the players ’ and fans’ relationship to both a 
videogame and its fictional world as well as esports based on that 
particular videogame are scarce. Our research addresses this gap by 
examining the relationships of players and fans of the videogame 
Overwatch  (Blizzard Entertainment 2016) with the fictional heroes 
of the game as well as with their favorite professional play ers in the 
newly started Overwatch League.  In essence, we are examining the 
relationship between game fandom and esports fandom.  
The two types of fandom have traditionally been researched 
separately. Fandom studies has been concerned with fans of fiction 
and music, while sports fandom has been a somewhat separate area 
of interest. Our study approaches these two phenomena with similar 
data and methods. We collected discussion forum data, and 
conducted a survey in order to analyze the ways fans discuss their  
favorite game characters and professional players. This data allows 
us to examine, how fans and players articulate these relationships , 
and identify the emerging similarities and differences.  
The analysis of these relationships is informed by theories of  
audience engagement with fictional charac ters (e.g. Phelan 1989; 
Phelan , Rabinowitz, Warhol et al. 2012; Smith 1995; Smith 2011) 
as well as fan studies (e.g. Booth 2010) and the study of sports 
fandom (e.g. Crawford 2004). The results of this study will 
contribute to the emerging field of study on game fandom in 
addition to esports research.  
1.1 Overwatch and Overwatch League  
Team -based online multiplayer first -person shooter Overwatch  was 
published in 2016 by Blizzard Entertainment. By 2017 it had Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this wo rk for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work own ed by others 
than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@ac m.org . 
FDG '19, August 26 –30, 2019, San Luis Obispo, CA, USA  
© 2019 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM.  
ACM 978 -1-4503 -7217 -6/19/08…$15.00FDG'19, August 26 -30, 2019, San Luis Obispo, CA, USA  T. Välisalo  et al.  
 
 
 gathered over 35 million active accounts (Activision Blizzard 
2018), won game of the year award and 2018 it won the esport 
game of the year award.  Placed somewhere in the distant future, 
Overwatch  brings us the heroes of a former squad known as the 
“Overwatch”. The squad’s task was to ensure peace and protect 
people across the globe from the robotic “omnics”, as well the 
enemies of this former squad and its allies. All of them – former 
member s of Overwatch , its enemies and omnics – together form the 
diverse pool  of playable heroes :  from an omnic (robotic) monk to 
genius gorilla raised in space Overwatch  offers a large variety of 
different heroes to be played. This is also visible in the gender 
division of the heroes as there is a fairly equal balance between 
male and female heroes – while the robotic omnics remain a  
minority. Different sexual orientation s are also present, albeit these 
only come visible  in the comics related to game – Overwatch  is 
designed as a transmedial product, and its story unveils mainly on 
the comics and shorts animations related to the game, not in the 
game itself. Furthermore, t he game presents a number of different 
ethnicities and nationalities as part of its character  roster. Blizzard 
has also stated that Overwatch  was designed to be “inclusive”, so 
the design choices have been conscious ones.  
Overwatch  is described as team -based first person shooter, but 
its playable heroes can also perform multiple other kind s of abilities 
than just shooting: depending on the hero, one can, for example, 
heal or damage through auto -aim beam and for instance “boop”, i.e. 
push enemies off the ma p with, certain abilities. Similarly to the  
diverse hero design, the multiplicity of different abilities can be 
seen as attractive to a diverse  player -base, even to those who do not 
have previous experience in playing shooter game s. Thus, 
regardless of bei ng a first -person shooter (FPS) game, it provides 
opportunities also for players not skilled in aiming. Indeed, the 
game has gathered many “casual” players and players new to FPS.  
Since the open beta, Overwatch  has had an active competitive 
scene, but it w as in early 2018 that Overwatch  as an esport gained 
momentum with the launch of the Overwatch League (OWL).  
OWL is a global esports league, which had 12 teams in its inaugural 
season (20 as of now). What sets OWL apart from many other 
esports leagues is t hat, following traditional sports, the teams 
represent different cities rather than established esports 
organizations. While the league is international, majority of the 
teams represent cities in USA. OWL is a franchised league, in 
which it furthermore f ollows traditional (USA based) team sport 
leagues.  OWL is also fully owned by Blizzard, the owner and 
developer of Overwatch . 
2 Theoretical background  
While there are many overlaps between game cultures and fan 
cultures, there is still relatively little r esearch bridging this gap 
between fields. While game studies has often foregrounded 
interactivity between players and game, interactivity is also 
emphasized in the study of fans (e.g. Booth 2010). Fan studies has 
for long demanded for fans’ self -identifica tion in order to call them 
fans. Even though not all players or esports spectators identify as 
fans (e.g. Wirman 2007), the lens of fan studies can be applied to research of game communities. In recent years fan studies 
approaches have also been applied to  communities and phenomena 
traditionally outside its scope, such as audiences of classical music. 
Definitions of fandom have also been updated. For example, Cornel 
Sandvoss defines fandom as a regular, emotionally involved 
consumption of a given popular te xt (Sandvoss 2005). 
Simultaneously, there has been a call for fandom studies 
approaches also from inside game studies. T.L. Taylor (2012, 188) 
has emphasized the importance of studying fandom for 
understanding gamers and game culture, e.g. play experience and 
identity formation.  
Sports research is another important theoretical background for 
this study. Overwatch  as an esport is marked by sportification, the 
process of reaching the status of sports (cf. Mora and Héas 2003). 
Sportification can also refer to a way elements from traditional 
sports are implemented as part of the representation of esports 
(Turtiainen et al. 2018). Furthermore, elements from traditional 
sports have been used as a way to legitimize espo rts and construct 
esports as a hypermasculine activity (Taylor, Jenson and de Castell 
2009). Our data suggests that both media and fans continuously 
draw parallels between esports and sports and 52% of our survey 
respondents indicated that they see esports  as a “sport amongst 
other sports”. Thus, it makes sense to take into account theories 
from the study of sport fans and fandom, particularly when 
examining how favorite players are discussed. This is all the more 
fruitful as research on sport fans is often  quite separate from the 
study of popular culture fandom.  
In fandom studies,  the affective relationships of fans with 
certain cultural markers as well as the hierarchy formed by the 
structure and intensity of these relationships within the fandom are 
unde rstood as building blocks of a constructed, performative and 
ever-changing identity (Grossberg 1992, 58 –59; Booth 2010, 20, 
60). Fans continuously observe and construct parallels between 
themselves and the object of their fandom thus making fan objects 
extensions of themselves , functioning simultaneously apart from 
and part of themselves (Sandvoss 2005, 96 –97, 102–103). The 
constructed nature of this process shows for example in r esearch on 
British football fans , which  shows how fans of the same team can 
build differing, even contradictory meanings, of the same team, as 
“winners” or “losers” based on their individual self -reflective 
connection to the fandom (Sandvoss 2005, 105).  
According to Crawford (2004), being a sport fan is often tied to 
locality and n ationality – fans are often fans of the local team or/and 
the national team. Sports fandom is also perceived as a 
predominantly masculine activity and women can have hard time 
negotiating their positions in often quite hierarchical sports fandom 
(Crawford 2004). According to Taylor, Jenson and de Castell 
(2009) women face similar difficulties while participating in 
esports and the world of esports is often described by terms such as 
neoliberal masculinity (Voorhees 2015), hegemonic masculinity 
(Taylor 2012) , and toxic meritocracy (Paul 2018), referring to the 
obstacles women and minorities face when trying to enter to the 
world of esports and the norm of the esport player as white or Asian 
young male .“I Never Gave Up”   FDG'19, August 26 -30, 2019, San Luis Obispo, CA, USA  
 
 3 Data  and Methods  
For our analysis, we have utilized two different datasets. Firstly, we 
have used data gathered from three different discussions forums:  
The formal official Overwatch  forums (the United Stated version) 
maintained by Blizzard (closed in February 2018); the current 
official Overwatch  forums (the United Stated version) maintained 
by Blizzard and subreddit (i.e. category) r/competitiveoverwatch  
on the Reddit discussion forum . Secondly, we have utilized survey 
data with 135 respondents gathered in August and Sep tember 2018.  
This paper and its focus is a part of larger, ongoing research on 
Overwatch  and Overwatch League as well different practices, 
communities and cultures surrounding them. As so, the survey 
questionnaire was designed based on the preliminary analysis of 
parts of the forum data. Designing the questionnaire also drew from 
earlier rese arch on character engagement (Välisalo 2017) as well as 
authors’ experience working with massive reception study projects: 
the Hobbit  research project and the Game of Thrones  research 
project.  
The forum data has been gathered in a number of ways. First, 
the data from old Blizzard Overwatch  forum was gathered from the 
former official Overwatch  discussions forums maintained by 
Blizzard Entertainment, the developer of Overwatch . The forum 
was closed in February 20, 2018, when the new forums were 
introduced. Fr om the old forums, we gathered the discussion 
threads from the forum section “General” with number of search 
words. The data was gathered in February 2018. The earliest posts 
are from May 2016 and the latest from February 2018. This data 
mainly helped us t o design the questionnaire. Second, another 
search was conducted in the current Blizzard Overwatch  forums 
with search word “favorite”, “favourite”, “fan” and “fandom” but 
only discussion threads, which clearly discussed about favorite 
heroes or hero fandom  were gathered. This search targeted posts 
from March  1, 2018 to August 1, 2018. The third forum data is 
gathered from the subreddit r/competativeoverwatch, which mainly 
hosts discussions about the Overwatch League. The search targeted 
all the posts up to 1.8.2018. Search words used were “favorite”, 
“favourite”, “fan” and “fandom”, but only discussion threads, 
which clearly discussed about favorite players or favorite teams 
were gathered. The selection of search words was based on daily 
reading of all the f orums since the beginning of 2018.  
In addition to the forum discussions, we analyzed data from 
survey.  The survey data was gathered in August and September 
2018 through opportunistic recruitment. Both those who play 
or/and watch Overwatch League were inv ited to answer. From the 
135 respondents 42% identified as female, 56% as male, and 2% as 
other. Respondents were from multiple nationalities, but the 
majority were Finnish (48%) and the second largest group were 
Americans (24%). All of our respondents had  played Overwatch  
and 112 respondents (83%) had watched OWL.  
As our method of analysis, we utilized close reading and 
thematic analysis (Guest, Macqueen and Namey 2012) on the 
forum data and applicable sections of the survey. For the forum 
data, we used da ta-driven coding using Atlas.ti software.  
As our method of analysis, we utilized close reading and 
thematic analysis ( Guest, Macqueen and Namey  2012) on the forum data and applicable sections of the survey. For the forum 
data,  we used data -driven coding us ing Atlas.ti software.  
4 Character Fandom  
At the time of the survey, Overwatch  had 28 playable heroes. 
Almost all respondents, 98.5%, chose a favorite gameplay -based 
hero, and 91.0% chose a favorite lore -based hero. While both 
percentages are high, it is notable that clearly fewer respondents 
mention a favorite lore -based hero than a favorite gameplay -based 
hero. The choices were dispersed across different heroes with only 
two, Torbjörn and Wrecking Ball, not chosen by anyone in either 
question. The latter can be explained by Wrecking Ball being a new 
hero at the time, launched in Ju ly 2018.  
There seems to be a gendered difference in which favorite 
characters were chosen. Reinhardt, a hyper masculine armored 
character in tank role, was the most popular lore -based hero in our 
survey, but barely any female respondents chose him. Male 
respondents chose Reinhardt most often as their favorite lore -based 
as well as gameplay -based character. Male respondents were far 
more likely to not have a favorite lore -based hero than female 
respondents.  
Mercy was the most popular gameplay -based hero amon g the 
respondents identifying as female, but there was no clear preference 
amongst females in regards to a favorite lore -based hero. Even 
though there is a common perception that men tend to have more 
experience with aiming as they on average have played s hooter 
games more and longer, it is notable that the playe r does not need 
to aim to play either Reinhardt or Mercy.  
Respondents were asked why they chose a particular character 
as a favorite, and instructed to choose all the relevant options. The 
options for lore -based and gameplay -based characters were almost 
the same, with altogether ten options in common, with additional 
two options available for lore -based favorite heroes.  
 
 
Figure 1:  Reasons for choosing a favorite  lore-based Overwatch  
hero.FDG'19, August 26 -30, 2019, San Luis Obispo, CA, USA  T. Välisalo  et al.  
 
 
  
Figure 2: Reasons for choosing a favorite  gameplay -based 
Overwatch  hero.  
Even though all available reasons for choosing a favorite hero 
appeared in responses to both questions, the prevalence of 
particular options differed quite expectedly between them: al most 
all respondents (94.8%) chose “abilities / game mechanics” as a 
reason for their  gameplay -based favorite, and most (91.9%) 
mentioned “playability”, while a large majority (73.3%) also chose 
“role in the game” (see Figure 2). Respondents also had the 
opportunity to mention other reasons in their own words. Most 
common reasons here for game -play-based heroes were also related 
to their abilities, for example a particular mechanic, such as rocket 
punch for Doomfist. Most common reasons for choosing lore -based 
favorites (see Figure 1) were “background story” (71.9%) and 
“personality” (68.2%).  
There were two additional options for lore -based favorites 
chosen by some respondents: “reminds me of myself” (11.9%) and 
“is the kind of person I would like to be” (1 8.5%)  (see Figure 1). 
The open text answers provide additional descriptions for these 
choices, and include mentions of gender and sexual orientation. 
Forum discussions also reveal further personal nuances of character 
engagement: values, such as Mercy’s p acifism and Doomfist’s 
belief in war as a vehicle of positive change, are discussed as 
reasons for liking or disliking characters. This phenomenon is in 
previous studies described as allegiance to a fictional character 
(Smith 1995, 96).  
Character abilities , manifested as mechanics, are not always 
distinguishable from character’s personality and appearance in 
discussions on favorite or least favorite characters on the official 
Overwatch  forum discussions. This provides background for 
interpreting survey resp onses and understanding why, for example, 
one in three respondents mention playability, which can be 
considered an element outside the narrative world, as a reason for 
choosing a lore -based favorite hero. Analysis of individual survey 
responses also shows that some options were chosen particularly 
often by the same respondents for both, lore -based and gameplay -
based favorites: “physical traits / appearance”, “personality”, 
“voice acting” and “role in the game”. This indicates that the so -
called mimetic elem ents of a character (Phelan  et al. 2012, 113), 
elements that make a character human -like, were important for 
engagement with a game character, whether the character was 
deemed important for its narrative or gameplay features.  Alterations to game charac ters are meaningful for players, 
which is evident in how  character alterations gave rise to emotional 
accounts on the discussion forum. Discussions did not express only 
resistance to change, even though changes to the playable hero 
Mercy were discussed widely , but also contentment or desire for 
change: “I never gave up. When Reaper was trash, I never gave up. 
I always kept ﬁghting for a buﬀ. And what kept me going was not 
meaningless trust in someone else, or worthless love. It was faith in 
myself, and in Reap er.” These affective articulations further 
demonstrate how character mechanics are interwoven with the 
player’s emotional response to the character and the game.  
5 Player  Fandom  
For the preparation of the survey and designing the questions, we 
analyzed discussions from Reddit’s subreddit C ompetitive 
Overwatch , in order to see how favorite players are discussed and 
what kinds of reasons discussants gave for someone being their 
favorite player. From the discussions, nine different reason s 
emerged:  the team the player is in, the history of the player (many 
of the OWL players have experience in competitive Overwatch  pre-
OWL, having played in pre -OWL teams and tournaments), a 
personal connection to the player, the place the player is from, 
player’s gameplay, the hero the player plays, the player’s 
personality, the player’s stream, and knowing the player from other 
games. Based on these, we designed the survey questions to further 
explor e the reasons for choices of favorite player.  
In the survey, we had two questions related to favorite player: 
Firstly, we asked the respondents to name their favorite player. 
Here the Finnish players were highly presented, most likely due to 
large amount of Finnish respondents. This also indicates that 
nationality is a factor when choosing favorite player. Secondly, we 
asked with multiple -choice question “Why is this player your 
favorite?”  
 
Figure 3: Reasons for choosing a fav orite professional 
Overwatch  player.  
Altogether 113 of our 135 survey respondents indicated that 
they wa tch or have watched Overwatch League. Out of those, 59% 
chose a favorite player.  All of the respondents who indicated that 
they watch all the OWL games also chose a favorite player. The 
three most common reasons for “why is this player your favorite” 
chosen from given options were players personality (39%), the hero 
the player plays (35%) and the nationality of the player (21%) (see“I Never Gave Up”   FDG'19, August 26 -30, 2019, San Luis Obispo, CA, USA  
 
 Figure 3).  The respondents were encouraged to choose as many 
reasons as they see fit.  
When examining the reasons given for option “other reasons, 
what?” the gender of the player was given as a prominent reason: 
number of respondents indicated that Geguri, the only female 
player in OWL, was their favorite  player and often singled out her 
gender as one of the reasons for that. One respondent wrote, “She 
is brave to be a woman in exports and rise above all the bullshit that 
female gamers go through. She is awesome for representation and 
shows other girls the y can be pro gamers too”. Another respondent 
articulated: “First female player in Overwatch , and I respect that 
greatly”.  
Another reason to arise from the “other reasons” was player’s 
sexual orientation. In September 2018, when the responses for the 
survey  were gathered, one player in OWL was openly gay. One 
response describes the meaning of this for the fan’s own identity:  
“Because he's gay like me. (I'm not joking)”.  
6 Comparing Fandoms  
When examining the reasons for favorite character and favorite 
players, there are overlapping factors: In both cases, gender as well 
as sexual orientation are deemed important – this came up in the 
open -ended questions. Personality, that of the favorite he ro or that 
of the favorite player, was also deemed very important in both 
categories. Another major  reason for someone being a favorite 
player was also the hero they played.  
Clear differences emerged  as well . While Overwatch  heroes 
represent different nat ionalities – for instance, Reinhardt is 
German, and Mercy is from Switzerland – the nationality of the 
favorite hero does not appear to play a significant part in the ways 
fans choose their favorite hero. By contrast, nationality emerged as 
an important re ason for choosing a favorite player. These results 
highlight the importance of bringing together the different research 
traditions in fandom - that of popular culture and that of sports - in 
order to understand the complex relationships fans forge with the ir 
favorite heroes and players. In the same vein, it needs to be asked 
why race nor ethnicity did not emerge as significant factors, even 
though previous literature suggests otherwise (i .e. Fletcher 201 0; 
Young 2014). Overwatch  also has a diverse cast of h eroes from 
different eth nicities and races, while Overwatch Leagu e players are 
mainly white and A sian. It is worthwhile to note that this result 
might be influenced by the limited sample of this survey.  
Furthermore, the survey indicated a difference betwe en 
engagement with fictional characters in games and other media. 
Few respondents chose  options related to identification with the 
game characters (“reminds me of myself” and “is the kind of person 
I would like to be”). This clearly differs from a previous study on 
film characters, where for the audiences of The Hobbit  fantasy film 
trilogy t he most common reason for choosing a favorite character 
was empathy or sympathy for the character (Välisalo 2017), most 
often expressed as finding the character “relatable” or “identifying” 
with the character. While similar reasons were present in the 
Over watch  survey data, they were chosen considerably less often.  7 Conclusions  
In our paper, we presented results from our study on how 
players and fans of Overwatch  and Overwatch League engage with 
playable heroes and esports players respectively. We analyzed  how 
they articulate the reasons for their choices of favorite heroes and 
players to determine if there are similarities in their modes of 
engagement. We started the research by doing preliminary analysis 
of forum discussions and further implemented a surv ey.  
We discovered that there are some significant overlaps, but also 
differences. Gender and sexual orientation emerged as important 
factors for engagement with both, the playable characters and 
esports players. We also found implications that there are 
differences in engagement with playable characters depending on 
the player’s own gender identification. By contrast, nationality was 
important for engaging with esports players, but not with playable 
characters. These results show that some identity markers  are more 
important for engagement with fictional characters than 
engagement with esports players  thus demonstrating the diversity 
of engagements with the fan object in the culture surrounding 
Overwatch .  
We found that mechanical and narrative elements of characters 
are intertwined in players’ engagement with them. Further research 
combining traditional game studies approaches with study of media 
audiences and fandom studies is needed to delve deeper into the 
differences and similarities in engagement with fictional characters 
in different media. This will enrich the understanding of player’s 
relationship with player characters and avatars.  
Given how important nationality of the players is for Overwatch  
esports  fans, it is noteworthy that the nationality of the playable 
heroes do es not hold the same importance . It must be asked, if this 
is because characters’ nationalities reside in the fictional world of 
the game where other narrative elements take precedence, or if the 
sportification  process of esports emph asizes the importance of 
players’ nationalities in esports fandom, similarly to traditional 
sports fandom.  
Further research should concentrate on the connections between 
esports and identity politics, as well as player characters and 
identity construction . For instance, the significance of gender as 
well as sexual orientation needs to be further researched by building 
on existing literature.  Examining the connection of these forms of 
engagement to player mentalities might also prove fruitful.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
This research was supported by the Academy of Finland project 
Centre of Excellence in Game Culture Studies (CoE -GameCult,  
312397) . 
REFERENCES  
[1] Activision Blizzard (2017, November 2). Activision Blizzard announces better -
than-expected  third quarter 2017 financial results. Investor.activision.com.  
[2] Paul Booth . 2010 . Digital Fandom. New Media Studies . Peter Lang , New York . 
[3] Garry  Crawford . 2004 . Consuming Sport . Fans, Sport and Culture . New York: 
Routledge.  
[4] M Fletcher  (2010 ). ‘You must support Chiefs; Pirates already have two white 
fans!’: race and racial discourse in South African football fandom , Soccer & 
Society, 11(1 –2), 79 –94.FDG'19, August 26 -30, 2019, San Luis Obispo, CA, USA  T. Välisalo  et al.  
 
 
 [5] Allen Guttmann . 1978. From ritual to record . The nature of modern sports . 
Columbia  University Press , New York . 
[6] Greg Guest, Kathleen M. MacQueen and Emily E. Namey . 2012. Applied 
thematic analysis . Sage Publications , Los Angeles, California & London . 
[7] L Grossberg 1992  Is There  a Fan in the House?: The A ffective Sensibility of 
Fandom,  The Adoring Audience: Fan Culture and Popular Media. Routledge. 
London and New York.  
[8] VM Karhulahti (2017). Reconsidering Esport: Economics and Executive 
Ownership. Physical Culture and Sport. Studies and Research, 74(1), 43 –53. 
[9] P Mora  and S Héas (2003). Du joueur de jeux vidéo à l'e -sportif: vers un 
professionnalisme  florissant de l'élite? Consommations et sociétés, 2003, 129–
145. 
[10] Christopher A. Paul. 2018. The toxic meritocracy of video games: Why gaming 
culture is the worst . University of Minnesota Press.  
[11] James  Phelan . 1989 . Reading People, Reading Plots. Character, Progression and 
the Interpretation of Narrative . University of Chicago Press.  
[12] J Phelan, P Rabinowitz, R Warhol, D Herman and B Richardson , 2012 Character , 
Narrative Theory: Core Concepts and Critical Debates . Ohio State University 
Press , Columbus. Ohio . 
[13] Cornel Sandvoss. 2005 . Fans . The Mirror of Consumption . Polity Press , Malden, 
Massachusetts . [14] Murray Smith, 1995. Engaging characters. Fiction, emotion, and the cinema . 
Oxford University Press.  
[15] M Smith, 2011. Engaging Characters: Further Reflections, Characters in 
Fictional Worlds . De Gruyter, New York, USA.  
[16] N Taylor, J Jenson and S De Castell ( 2009 ). Cheerleaders/booth babes/Halo hoes: 
pro-gaming, gender and jobs for the boys.  Digital Creativity, 20(4), 239 –252. 
[17] T.L Taylor . 2012. Raising the Stakes.  E-Sports and the Professionalization of 
Computer Gaming . MIT Press , Cambridge, Massachusetts .  
[18] R Turtiainen , U Friman and M Ruotsalainen  (2018). “Not Only for a Celebration 
of Competitive Overwat ch but Also for National Pride ”. Sportificating the 
Overwatch  World Cup 2016, Games and Culture, August 2018.  DOI: 
10.1177/1555412018795791 . 
[19] G Voorhees , 2015  Neoliberal masculinity: The government of play and 
masculinity in  e-sports , Playing to Win:  Sports, Video  Games, and the Culture of 
Play.  Indiana University Press , Indiana , USA.  
[20] T Välisalo (2017) . Engaging with film characters : Empirical study on the 
reception of characters in The Hobbit films. Fafnir: Nordic Journal of Science 
Fiction and Fantasy  Research, 4 (3 –4), 12–30. 
[21] H Wirman  (2007) . “I am not a fan, I just play a lot ” – If Power Gamers Aren ’t 
Fans, Who Are? Situated Play, Proceedings of DiGRA 2007 Co nference . 
[22] H Young (2014 ). Race in online fantasy  fandom: Whiteness on Westeros. org. 
Continuum, 28(5), 737 –747.