Designing with People with Disabilities: Adapting Best 
Practices of DIY and Organizational Approaches  
Ravihansa Rajapakse, Margot Brereton, Paul Roe, Laurianne Sitbon 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology  
2 George St, Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia 
[saumya.rajapakse, m.brereton, p.roe, laurianne.sitbon]@qut.edu.au  
 
ABSTRACT 
Individualization of design is often necessary particularly 
when designing with people with disabilities. Maker 
communities, with their flex ible Do-It-Y ourself (DIY ) 
practices, offer potential to support individualized and 
cost-effective product design. However, efforts to adapt DIY practices in designing with people with disabilities 
tend to face difficulties with regard to continuous commitment, infrastructure provision and proper guidance. We carried out interviews with diverse 
stakeholders in the disability services sector and carried 
out observations of local makerspaces to understand their current practices and potential for future collaborations. 
We found that m akerspace participants face difficulties in 
terms of infrastructure provision and proper guidance 
whereas Disability Service Organizations face difficulties 
in continuous expertise. We suggest that artful 
infrastructuring to blend the best of both approaches offers potential to create a sustainable community that 
can design individualized technologies to support people 
with disabilities.  
Author Keywords 
Disability services, Individualized design, Maker 
Communities , DIY Design 
ACM Classificat ion Keywords 
H.5.2 User Interfaces, H.1 m Miscellaneous 
INTRODUCTION 
With the advances in technology, production fac ilities 
and skilled workforce, there is a growth in pr oduction of 
technological applications. During pre-industrial times 
people used to develop things they require on their own, 
making the artefacts  catered to wards  s pecific needs  (Sennett, 2008). This ideology has been disturbed with 
the dominant ‘one size fits all approach’  t h a t  f u e l l e d  
through the industrial revolution. Technological 
applications both in physical and virtual forms are often produced for a generic population (Hook et al.,  2 0 1 4 ) .  
The division of labor has ensured that the designers 
design for p e o p l e  r a t h e r  t h a n  d e s i g n  with p e o p l e ,  t h a t  
created a difference in requirements and technologies. The HCI community is interested in importance and new ways of incorporating individualized practices in the 
design of everyday technologies. 
The ability to ‘bend’ an application towards specific 
needs is particularly important for people with disabilities (Hsieh et al. , 2014; Hook et al.,  2 0 1 4 ;  J o h n s o n  et al. , 
2013). Apart from the usual difference in preferences, people with the same category o f  d i s a b i l i t y  m a y  h a v e  
varying requirements. While high end technological 
applications ease access to information and people, they 
pose difficulties in terms of individualization (Dawe, 
2014; De Couvreur & Goossens, 2011). Customizations 
for such technologies demand some expertise or a 
monetary payment from the end us er (Hook et al.,  2014). 
Disability Service Organizations (DSOs) have experience in providing long-term support to people with disabilities 
through their paid and volunteer networks. Projects 
initiated by the DSOs follow more traditional design methodologies  an d incorporate dis ab ility services experts. 
While DSOs initiate inspiring designs, adhering to 
specific m ethodologies and tim e plans can lim it the room  for creativity. DSOs often seek expertise of volunteers to design technologies and one of the DSOs that works 
closely with our University recruits university students as volunteers. Most of the students involve in these projects as a partial requirement of their degree. While this results 
in innovative projects, it also poses difficulties in 
continuous development, as leaving students possess crucial working knowledge of projects.  
The notion of maker communities is becoming popular as 
they follow uniquely flex ible practices in collaborative 
environments that encourage creative designs (Lindtner et 
al., 2014). The artefacts they create are often 
individualized as the end users are the ones who build 
them, making the gap between the designer and user 
minimal. The knowledge s haring in collaborative 
environments also aids bridging this gap. The main roots 
of their efforts are intrinsic motivations to design things 
and are not often restricted by technology or strict project 
plans (Jackson & Kang, 2014; Moilanen, 2012). They use 
tools such as kit technologies and 3D printing that can be learnt easily and day-to-day objects to create artefacts (Hook et al.,  2014; Hurst & Kane, 2013).  
If flexible DIY design practices can be adopted in organizational efforts, there is a potential to improve the 
quality of individualization in design while keeping the 
costs low (Hurst & Kane, 2013; De Couvreur & 
Go o s s en s , 2011;  Hu rs t  & To b ias , 2011). Dis ab ilit y  
service ex pertise and infrastructural resources of DSOs 
may aid people who develop technologies  with  people with disabilities to sustain their projects (Hook et al. , 
Permission  to  mak e d ig ital or ha rd  cop ies of all or pa rt of th is w ork for  
personal or classroom use is granted w ithout fee provided tha t copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstrac ting w ith cre dit is perm itted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistri bute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permission s@acm .o rg .  
OzCHI '14 , December 02 - 05 2014, Sydney, NSW, Australia Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM. ACM 978-1-4503-0653-9/14/12…$15.00  
http:// dx.doi .org/10.1145/2686612.2686694   
5192014). To identify and adapt such practices, it is 
necessary to understand different motivations, success factors and difficulties of maker communities and DSOs. 
Such studies can pave the way for collaborations amongst 
makers  and DSOs  that can further enhance des ign 
practices. This paper ex plores ways to adapt best 
practices of DIY  and DSO approaches in co-designing 
technologies with people with disab ilities. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
It is commonly believed that that a technology catered 
towards a specific category of disability can serve every person in that category (Kintsch & Depaula, 2002). Some 
researchers argue that this approach is an over-
sim plification as each person m ay have contrasting 
requirements even though they may fall into the same 
category (Hook et al.,  2 0 1 4 ;  D e  C o u v r e u r  &  G o o s s e n s ,  
2011; Scherer, 2002). Off-the-shelf commercial 
applications are usually made for a generic population and often fail to meet complex  individual needs (De 
Couvreur & Goossens , 2011; Scherer, 2002). If customizations are required (which is often the case), user 
needs to be an ex pert in tweaking the technology or needs 
to pay ex tra money get it done by ex perts (Hook et al.,  
2014; Kintsch & Depaula, 2002).  
Maker communities are of interest as they foster DIY  
design practices that result in individualized technologies 
at lower costs. A maker community is a group of people 
who get together regularly and work on common constructive interests ranging from making toys to 
developing high end robots (Lindtner et al. , 2014). They 
use ex isting artefacts and site-specific tools such as high-
level electronic kits, 3D printers and laser cutters to create artefacts (Hartmann et al. , 2008). The availability of 
online support and the collaborative nature of 
makers paces  make it eas y to learn s uch tools , lowering 
the entry barrier in design for non-ex perts (Lindtner et al. , 
2014). The use of discarded/day-to-day objects as design 
materials  helps  to lower the cos t of des ign while 
maintenance cos t are kept at a minimum due to the us er’s  
role as the maker (Jackson & Kang, 2014). Although uncommon at present, makerspaces are moving from a 
sole focus on technical interests such as electronics, 
computer networking and robotics, towards more social aspects such as fostering collaboration, ex hibitions and 
workshops (Lindtner et al. , 2014; Moilanen, 2012).  
There are efforts to empower people with disabilities 
using DIY  practices, though large scale collaborative 
work is seldom seen (Hook et al., 2014). In an inspirational series of workshops, university students 
collaborated with people with disabilities to envision and 
develop various day-today gadgets using DIY  tools 
(Mcallister, 2012). This project yielded positive results in 
terms of engagement during the design, as much as for 
the resulting designs themselves. The group formed for 
this particular project was dissolved afterwards due to the 
other commitments of the students. The Robohand (2013) 
is a project to make workable prosthetic mechanical 
hands. The project was borne of a disabled person’s need 
and collaborations with other parties such as maker 
communities and organizations led him to produce prosthetic hands for more than 200 people. Hook et al., 2014; Hurst & Kane 2013; and Hurst & Tobias 2011 have discussed the benefits of DIY 
approaches in designing with people with disabilities. 
They argued that such an approach has the potential to develop individualized technologies whilst keeping down design and maintenance costs. While their studies focused 
on using DIY  technologies with pioneering groups of 
people with disabilities, they have not considered 
collaborative efforts between DSOs and maker 
communities. Bannon and Ehn (2012) discussed the 
importance of building hybrid models of different design practices. They argued that blending of organizational 
practices with new ‘open’ forms of innovative approaches 
holds the key for design appropriation. We suggest that such an infrastructure is required particularly for the 
design of technologies with people with disab ilities to 
sustain longer with enhanced benefits.   
This project explores the potential of developing hybrid 
approaches that draw upon successful practices of DIY communities and DSOs. DSOs have ex perience in 
providing long-term support to people with disab ilities 
through their paid and volunteer networks, although they 
may lack experience in DIY technologies . DIY 
communities on the other hand are creative spaces 
supporting DIY , but in their ab ility to reliably apply their 
efforts to supporting people with disab ilities to create 
individualized technologies is unknown.  
METHODS 
A series of in-depth sem i-structured interviews was carried out with six  participants in the disability services 
field. Interview participants included two innovators with disabilities (P1 & P2), an ex ecutive member of a DSO 
(P3), a designer who develops software and hardware 
applications with people with disabilities (P4) and two 
occupational therapists (P5 & P6). P1 was also an ex ecutive member of a DSO in the USA. P2 is a 
technician affiliated with a tec hnology research institute 
in Australia. P3, P4 and P5 were affiliated with a DSO in 
Australia. P6 was an occupational therapist affiliated with 
a DSO for people in remote areas in Australia. Interviews 
lasted approximately one hour and discussions were 
based on several key areas such as their personal and 
organizational design practices, current technologies and the importance of design individualization. 
In addition to the interviews, some preliminary discussions have been carried out with a DSO (D1) that 
works closely with our University to initiate co-design 
projects amongst students, academic staff and people with 
(especially with intellectual) disabilities. This DSO 
supports people with disab ilities in Australia to have 
opportunities and choices of an ordinary life. Over two months  we attended s ome of their meeting groups  and 
have held discussions with ex ecutive members and 
academic staff members. Two of the authors worked actively in some projects initiated by D1. These projects 
are scoped to last one semester and students earn academic credit for completing tasks. Two local makers paces  have been obs erved over three months  to 
understand their practices. Simple observations of 
makers paces  and informal dis cus s ions  with members  were conducted. One of the makerspaces develops 
520creative technological devices mostly as hobbies of the 
members  (M1) while the other makers pace develops  
gadgets that are sometimes catered for ex ternal users 
(M2). In both makerspaces, paid members can attend the 
physical workspaces anytime and work on their projects 
while the public can visit on specific days to have a look 
and have discussions. Additionally, we attended some 
regular meet-ups and volunteered in a maker faire . A 
Maker Faire is an ex hibition of design artefacts created in a makerspace (Jackson & Kang, 2014). 
FINDINGS 
Three main themes emerged from the investigations: 
motivations  to develop technologies , des ign practices  and 
the need for collaborations. 
Motivations 
All the interview participants highlighted the im portance 
of catering for specific needs particularly for people with 
disabilities. As an ex ample, P5 stated that the layout of 
buttons of a video game controller device is crucial since 
people have unique physical orientations. “One 
technology you develop will not be suitabl e to another 
even if they have the same type of a disability”. The Cost 
of high end technologies is another barrier pointed out by 
the participants. P4 and P6 mentioned that one of their clients opted to design a DIY keyboard for his son who 
has upper limb movement difficulties as commercial 
products are very ex pensive. One of the key motivations 
for the students to engage in the projects initiated by D1 
is the reward of academic credits. However, further in-
depth discussions are required to ex plore other 
motivations  they may pos s es s  towards  s uch projects . 
While cost and individualization seem  to be the key 
motivations  according to the interview participants , 
people involved in makerspaces seemed to have different 
perspectives. Individualization in fact is an inherent result 
of user being the maker and cost was much less an issue 
than the ex perience and satisfaction of making an artefact. 
We noticed that som e of the artefacts can be purchased even off-the-shelf without much cost difference. At the 
maker faire we witnes s ed a s trong s ens e of pride in their inventions. Although some microcontrollers were there for sale we could not see any artefact with a price tag. 
Preliminary discussions with some of the makers 
suggested that they enjoy m aking different artifacts in the absence of a wish for capital gain. This was evident with 
som e of the artefacts (a single string guitar, a toy spider) 
that were purely made for fun than for functional requirements. We found that the intrinsic motivations to 
design artefacts mattered much more than the cost as a 
maker noted  "Developing something useful for you on 
your own can mean the world to you!”  
Design Practices 
Makers like to ex periment with objects, sometimes without thinking much about the aesthetics or functionalities. "We build first, plan later”.  They accept 
the possibility of making errors both as a challenge and 
an opportunity to learn new things. Their learning methods  are focus ed around frien dly chats  within the 
makers paces  and online res ources . W e have noticed that 
mos t of the members  are happy to s hare their knowledge or even physical resources (gadgets, sensors, electronic kits, etc.). Their attitude of learning through doing facilitates a flexible design approach where changes can 
be made at almost any time in the design cycle. However, 
it was difficult to see many proper documented accounts 
of their designs apart from some online blogs and notes. The design practices that D1 follow are well documented 
such as Agile Software Development Methodology . With 
the timelines of the students and stakeholders they don’t 
have much option, but to adhere to such methodologies, 
strict tim elines and docum enting practices. 
Need for Collaborations 
P2 collaborated with a motorcycle mechanic to build a 
scooter that can be operated from  his wheelchair that is 
placed in the sidecar. This invention has given him an enormous increase in independence. He stated that he has 
used his knowledge in mathematics and computer science 
with the help of his able-bodied friends in the development. “I did not get any support from any 
organization. This was an effort entirely by me and my friends” . He publicised and shared his design though his 
blog in order to encourage other people with disabilities 
to develop their own personal transport. However, he did 
not see any evidence of this invention reaching a wider 
community. His comments suggested a potential of 
reaching a wider audience with the support from 
organizational resources and continuous ex pertise. He also mentioned the importance of providing more control 
over the design for end users in order to elevate their 
‘sense of security’. He suggested a promising approach would be to use DIY technologies, such as electronic kits 
that are usable by a wide range of people. P4, P5 and P6 
also appreciated the potential of DIY  electronic kits to 
design such technologies as they are easy to learn and 
inexpensive. Such practices can allow people with 
disabilities and their s upport groups to design 
technologies that can not only reduce frustrations, but 
also can provide rewarding ex periences.  
A discussion with one of the founding m em bers of M1 revealed that two of their members have physical 
disabilities and are attempting to develop technologies for themselves. But, he noted that their progress with the 
design is slow as there is no advice and support from 
disability services ex perts. Collaborations with DSOs might be a promis ing way to provide this  s upport to 
sustain longer.  
Difficulties that DSOs face are mainly focused around 
continuous volunteer involvement. After the completion 
of the projects, students move on, although there are cases 
where some students stay longer to provide support. 
Ens uring continuity is  one of the concerns  highlighted by ex ecutive and academic staff members involved with D1. DSO service provision focuses mainly on technology 
adaptation and use rather than technology design and development for individual needs. The prospect of engaging in more DIY design work to support individuals 
is appealing but untested. Some executive and university 
staff m em bers involved with D1 suggested designing collaboratively with ex ternal parties such as maker 
communities may has the potential to overcome these 
difficulties.  
521DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
Investigations of both DSOs and makerspaces reinforced 
the claims in literature of benefits in adapting DIY  practices in design efforts with people with disabilities. 
The flexible DIY practices and the supportive environments of maker communities may facilitate more individualized and creative design ideas while lowering 
the cost of development. Increased participation of end users in the design process can reduce frustrations in use of technologies. Makerspaces consist of people who 
possess intrinsic motivations to  create new things. 
Whether such m otivations of m akerspace m em bers will 
ex tend to working on projects with people with 
disabilities is an open question that requires further 
investigation. We suggest that while adapting DIY is 
beneficial, integrating infrastructural practices of DSOs 
may als o be neces s ary. Managerial and infras tructural 
resources of DSOs may aid people who are interested in 
designing with people with disabilities to receive proper 
guidance to improve and sustain their work (Hook et al. , 
2014).   
While it is difficult to see organized collaborative efforts 
in practice, we have sensed a willi ngness to do so 
amongst the makerspaces and DSOs. We suggest that an 
artful blend of practices of makerspaces and DSOs might 
benefit stakeholders in number of ways. DSOs can benefit 
from flexible design practices and DIY expertise from 
makers paces  whereas  makers paces  can benefit from 
disability service ex pertise and infrastructural resources from DSOs. Ultimately people with disabilities can 
benefit from the provision of individualized technologies 
at low costs and ongoing support for maintenance and development. Such an approach has the potential to 
improve the quality of products and sustainability of the 
projects. Essentially, what we are proposing is artful 
infrastructuring (Star & Bowker, 2006) to strengthen the 
efforts of designing technologies with people with disabilities. Such infrastructuring encompasses drawing 
together of resources, practices and values from different 
stream s to nurture co-design practices (B annon & E hn, 
2012). This study w ill explore key infrastructural 
elements of DIY and DOS practices through collaborative approaches. Initiating regular inter-party meeting groups, 
workshops from each party and mini-maker faires in collaboration with local makerspaces and DSOs can be 
promising ways forward. Further investigations of 
motivations  and difficulties  for each s takeholder may help to understand effective collaborative practices. While 
collaborations may lead to projects that can benefit people with disabilities, collaborative design ex periences can potentially generate guidelines for projects where 
individualized technologies are required at lower costs to 
empower people with disabilities. 
REFERENCES 
Bannon, L. J., & Ehn, P. ‘Des ign matters in Participatory 
Design’. In Routledge international handbook of participatory design (pp. 37–63). Routledge. 2012. 
Dawe, M. Desperately Seeking Simplicity: How Young 
Adults with Cognitive Disab ilities and Their Families 
Adopt Assistive Technologies. Proc.  A C M  S I G C H I  
2014  (pp. 1143–1152). New York, NY, USA: ACM.  De Couvreur, L., & Goossens, R. Design for (every) one: 
Co-creation as  a bridge between universal design and rehabilitation engineering. CoDesign , 7(2), 107–121. 
2011. 
Hartmann, B., Doorley, S., & Klemmer, S. R. Hacking, 
Mashing, G luing: Understanding Opportunistic Design. IEEE Pervasive Computing, 7(3), 46–54. 2008. 
Hook, J., Verbaan, S., Durrant, A., Olivier, P., Wright, P., 
& Hague, T. A Study of the Challenges Related to 
DIY Assistive Technology in the Context of Children 
with Disabilities. Proc. DIS 2014 (pp. 597–606). 
Hsieh, G., Munson, S. A., Kaptein, M. C., Oinas-
Kukkonen, H., & Nov, O. Personalizing Behavior Change Technologies. CHIEA 2014 (pp. 107–110). 
New York, NY, USA: ACM.  
Hurst, A., & Kane, S. Making “Making” Accessible. 
Proc. IDC 2013  ( pp.  6 3 5 –6 3 8 ) .  N ew  Y or k ,  N Y ,  U S A:  
ACM. 
 Hurst, A., & Tobias, J. Empowering Individuals with 
Do-it-yourself Assistive Technology. Proc. ACM 
SIGACCESS 2011 (pp. 11–18). New York, NY, USA: 
ACM. 
Jackson, S. J., & Kang, L. Breakdown, Obsolescence and 
Reuse: HCI and the Art of Repair. Proc.  CHI SIGCHI 
2014 (pp. 449–458). 
Johnson, R., Bianchi-Berthouze, N., Rogers, Y., & van 
der Linden, J. Embracing Calibration in Body Sensing: Using Self-tweaking to Enhance Ownership 
and Performance. Proc. Ubicomp 2013  (pp. 811–820). 
New York, NY, USA: ACM. 
Kintsch, A., & Depaula, R. A framework for the adoption 
of Assistive Technology. Proc. ASSETS 2002  (pp. 1–
10). ACM Press (2002) 
Lindtner, S., Hertz, G. D., & Douris h, P. Emerging Sites  
of HCI Innovation: Hackerspaces, Hardware Startups 
and Incubators. Proc.  CHI SIGCHI 2014 (pp. 439–
448).  
Mcallister, M. Arduino For Disabilities. Arduino For 
Disabilities. Accessed 25 Mar, 2013. 
http://arduinofordisabilities.wordpress.com/   
Moilanen, J. Emerging hackerspaces - Peer-production 
generation. Open Source Systems: Long-Term Sustainability (pp. 94–111). Springer. 2012. 
Robohand 2013 Complete set of mechanical anatomically 
driven fingers by robohand:
 Accessed 23 Mar, 2013 
http://www robohand net/  
Scherer, M. J. The change in emphasis from people to 
person: introduction to the special issue on assistive 
technology. Disability and Rehabilitation , 24(1-3), 1–
4. 2002. 
Sennett, R. The Craftsman . Yale University Press. 2008. 
Star, S. L., & Geoffrey C. Bowker. ‘How to 
infrastructure’. Handbook of new media: Social 
shaping and social consequences of ICTs. 230-245. 
2006. 
522