The SILAS model: Sexual Infections as Large-scale
Agent-based Simulation
Stefan Scholz
Dept. of Public Health,
Bielefeld University
Universitaetsstr. 25, 33615
Bielefeld, Germany
stefan.scholz@uni-bielefeld.deManuel Batram
Dept. of Business
Administration & Economics,
Bielefeld University
Universitaetsstr. 25, 33615
Bielefeld, Germany
mbatram@wiwi.uni-
bielefeld.deWolfgang Greiner
Dept. of Public Health,
Bielefeld University
Universitaetsstr. 25, 33615
Bielefeld, Germany
wolfgang.greiner@uni-
bielefeld.de
ABSTRACT
The SILAS model is an agent-based simulation of hu-
man sexual behavior incorporating heterogenous behav-
ior of agents with respect to age, sex, sexual orientation
and relationship status. Behavior rules are not only ap-
plied to the realization of sexual contacts, but also on
ending and forming relationships, death and child birth.
Thus, the agent population endogenously re-populates
itself. This allows not only to simulate the transmission
of sexually transmitted infections between adult agents,
but also mother-child infection paths. The model can
simulate the eect on the overall population and can
therefore be used for the epidemiological, public health
or health economic evaluation of tailored interventions
for sub-populations. In this paper we describe the use
of the SILAS model on syphilis and present preliminary
results.
Author Keywords
agent-based model; epidemiology; demographics;
sexually transmitted infections
ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
I.6.1 SIMULATION AND MODELING (e.g. Model De-
velopment). : Miscellaneous; I.2.11 Distributed Arti-
cial Intelligence: Multiagent systems; I.6.5 Model Devel-
opment; J.3 LIFE AND MEDICAL SCIENCES: Health
1. INTRODUCTION
Agent-based models (ABM) simulate decision-making
and interacting entities as autonomous software agents.
Hence, ABM is a method of interest to answer a variety
of research questions in the eld of health economics,
ranging from classical modeling for health technology
assessment to assessment of policy impact on social se-
curity systems. Independent of the research question at
SCSC 2015, July 26-29, 2015, Chicago, IL, USA
©2015 Society for Modeling & Simulation International (SCS)hand, a realistic depiction of all relevant population char-
acteristics in the agent population is the basis for retriev-
ing valid answers. In this context, the economic eval-
uation of interventions (behavioral or technological) of
infectious disease must rely on a suciently realistic de-
piction of the disease dynamic. The spread of infectious
diseases not only depends on the course of the disease,
but also on the population structure and on behavioural
aspects relating on the heterogeneity of patients or pa-
tient groups. Therefore, eects caused by certain indi-
viduals may not be covered by the models mostly used
in epidemiology or public health so far, as only expected
values of a population are incorporated in those models
(i.e. Markov, dynamic transmission). A famous example
to demonstrate the inuence of the non-average behavior
of a single individual is the spread of HIV in the United
States via a ight attendant in the 1980's. [1] Modeling
the spread of HIV using only expected values regarding
mobility and number of sex-partners would have failed
to include this kind of behavior and therefore the spread
of the disease would have been underestimated. ABM
can incorporate the heterogeneity of individuals and the
variety of their behaviors to provide more valid and re-
liable results in epidemiology, public health and health
economic evaluation of infectious diseases.
This paper presents rst results from the Sexual Infec-
tions as Large-Scale Agent-based Simulation (SILAS)-
model, on the spread of syphilis in Germany. As ad-
ditional feature to existing literature on ABM in sexu-
ally transmitted infections (STIs), which reports results
for the subgroup of men who have sex with men [9], the
agent population in SILAS is representative for the whole
German population.
2. METHODS
2.1. Software environment
The SILAS-model is implemented in the FLAME-
framework [20]. The software is using the X-machine
framework to operationalize agent behavior and interac-
tion via a messageboard system [4]. Each agent has a set
of 21 memory variables (e.g. age, sex, sexual orientation
and relationship status) with its individual value sets
1stored in a XML-le. Those XML-les are modied by
C-code containing the behavior rules of agents, i.e. the
rules on how the value set of one agent is altered. These
rules may be functions of the value set of an agent itself
or on the value set of any other agent in the population
communicated via the messageboard.
Agents in the starting population (the rst XML-le) are
intialised with their memory variables being representa-
tive for the general German population. In addition, age-
, sex- and sexual orientation-specic relationship rates
and according age dierences between the partners are
applied. Within each model iteration (one day) agents
run through the model according to the model ow de-
picted in gure 1.
2.2. Demographic related behavior
In the rst period of each iteration, agents update their
memory variables independent of interactions with other
agents. For example, the day of pregnancy is increased,
the age is incremented if the iteration matches the
agent's birthday or methods of contraception are cho-
sen. The model incorporates two types of contraception:
STI-protecting contraception (i.e. condoms) and non-
STI-protecting contraceptional methods (i.e. pill, di-
aphragma, etc.). Agents can use no contraception, either
one of both methods or both methods at the same time.
Also, at this point in time, agents determine whether
they die on the next day, in which case they get removed
from the agent population.
The second period of time serves for intention-building
of sexually active agents (age 15) and the communi-
cation of intentions related to relationships and sexual
contacts. Thereby, the intention for a new relationship
is communicated to a helping "stat-agent" and break-
up intentions are directly communicated to the partner.
The "stat-agent" collects all agents with the intention
for nding a new partner, matches these agents accord-
ing to age and sexual orientation and communicates the
result back to the agents in the next iteration. This ap-
proach was chosen for computational reasons to avoid
redundant readings of the messageboard by all agents.
All relationship-related memory variables are updated
in the relationship-function.
Sexual intentions are transformed to sexual contacts in
relationships without the use of messages assuming sym-
metric intentions for sexual contact in relationships [3].
Sexual intentions of singles are communicated to the
"stat-agent" in the same way as the intention for a new
relationship. Unfaithful behavior is possible, whereas a
non-single agent behaves like a single agent.
In the nal period single or unfaithful agents are no-
tied, whether a sexual contact was realized. If the
agents were using no contraception this sexual contact
may lead to pregnancy or it may lead to an infection
if no condom was used. As not every unprotected sex-
ual contact leads to pregnancy several factors of fertility
are represented in the model. (I) The sexual contactstart
1
2
endstart
1
2
3
endidleUpdate Memory
idle
PregnancyCommunicate intentions
RelationshipCount agents Remove agent
Sexual contactPartner matchingDead Alive
Age15Age <15
FemaleMaleBreak-up
New
partner
Pre
gnancySe
arch for partner
On
e-night standPar
tner died
Figure 1 .General, daily model-ow of the SILAS model:
Circles denote the different states of the agents, squares denote func-
tions, green lines denote messages sent and black lines denote the
ﬂow of agents through the model. The ﬂow on the left depicts the
statistical agent, the right side the person agents.
needs to take place in the fertile period of the women
and the daily probability of conception in this period
depends on time until ovulation, which was taken as an
average from published literature [2, 22, 5]. (II) These
daily probabilities of conception additionaly depend on
the maternal age, where a negative, linear trend was es-
timated from the literature [6]. (III) Finally, natural
sterility may avoid pregnancy following a sexual contact
which aects roughly 10 percent of the German popula-
tion [8]. If all these barriers have been avoided, the mem-
ory variable for pregnancy is incremented in the female
agent each day. After between 250 and 285 iterations the
agent gives birth and another agent (of age 0) is added to
the agent population. Nevertheless, the risks of sponta-
2neous and induced abortion needs to be considered after
conception. Age-specic rates of induced abortions for
Germany were taken from federal statistics [7] and are
tted as an age-dependend polynomial function for the
inclusion in the model. As German, age-specic rates
of spontaneuous abortions were not available, estimates
were taken from a Danish registry-based study [14] and
adjusted by the country-specic, competing risks of in-
duced abortion. The risk of spontaneous abortion is then
included as an exponential function in the model. During
each day of pregnancy a random number is drawn and
evaluated against the daily, age-dependent probabilities
of abortion calculated from the respective functions.
2.3. Disease modeling
Agents of the starting population have age-, sex- and
sexual orientation-specic probabilities of a syphilis in-
fection [18]. The modeling of the infection itself is
modeled similarly to pregnancy. Agents are informed
if they realized an sexual contact and if they did not
use STI-potecting contraception (according to their own
and their sexual partners memory variable) the STI is
passed from one agent to another with a certain prob-
ability. Once an agent is infected its memory variable
for the disease is incremented to 1 (infectious asymp-
tomatic). Each day the agent has a certain probabil-
ity to move to another disease state according to the
Markov-model depicted in gure 2. At the current state
of SILAS, the course of the disease is modeled indepen-
dently from agent characteristics and the current disease
state is documented in the agents memory variable.
After the infection with the bacteria, patients remain
asymptomatic for 3-4 weeks (min 10, max 90 days) un-
til a rst painless ulcer develops at the site of inocula-
tion (LUES I). [19] After 2-3 weeks patients move to the
infected asymptomatic I health state as the ulcer heals
without treatment. After 1-3 months after the initial
infection patients can develop a variety of symptoms,
but mostly skin lesions, in the LUES II health state
lasting 2-8 weeks. [12] After the spontaneous healing
of the LUES II-phase,2=3of the patients remain in an
asymptomatic state for the rest of their lifes, whereas
the remaining persons may develop any form of the ter-
tiary LUES health state. This includes gummae (soft,
non-cancerous growth of tissue), cardiovascular symp-
toms following blood vessel inammation (10 to 30 years
after initial infection) and neuro-syphilis resulting in dif-
ferent forms of dementia (1 to 30 years after initial in-
fection). [19] Only these LUES III-health state may lead
to disease-attributable mortality. Because of the early
possible onset of neuro-syphilis a health state for early
neuro-syphilis is included in the model.
From the start of the simulation, the spread of the dis-
ease is only governed by the behavior rules and interac-
tions of the agents described in section 2.2.. Depending
on the health state of the agent, dierent probabilities
of transmission by unprotected sexual contact between
agents and age- and sex-specic diagnosis and treatmentrates are applied from reported data. [18] Furthermore,
congenital transmission at birth is modeled explicitly as
the child inherits its mothers value of the disease memory
variable.
Susceptible
Infected
asymptomatic
LUES I
Infected
asymptomatic IEarly
Neuro-Syphilis
LUES IINeuro-Syphilis
Infected
asymptomatic II
LUES III
CardioLUES III
Gumma
Death
Figure 2 .Course of the disease of syphilis within each
agent: Each node represents a Markov-state, arrows denote the di-
rection in which agents in a certain health state can move.
2.4. Behavior estimation
The agent behavior (interaction and memory updating)
is modeled stochastically and is estimated using data of
the German federal statistics oce, the Robert Koch-
Institute [18], published literature, and the PAIRFAM
dataset [13, 11]. The latter is a representative Panel
Analysis of Intimate Relationships and Family Dynamics
with detailed information about the number and length
of a persons relationship, their sexual and contraceptive
behavior.
As each agent has dierent values stored in his mem-
ory variables and the behavior should reect its depen-
dence on those values, dierent distributions are needed
for each possible value set of the agent memory. Us-
ing generalized linear regression models, parameters of
dierent probability distributions can be estimated from
real-life data (i.e. PAIRFAM) with the explanatory vari-
ables corresponding to the memory variables of agents in
3the model. For example, all four parameters of the zero-
one-inated- b-distribution [15], which is used to model
all probabilities in the model (e.g. probability of a sex-
ual contact), have been estimated conditional on age,
sexual orientation, length of relationship, etc. The re-
sulting regression coecients of those variables are trans-
ferred into the model and agents use them to calculate
their individual probability distributions conditional on
their memory value set. Afterwards the agent behav-
ior is realized as a random draw from those distribu-
tions. As the PAIRFAM dataset has a panel design,
random eect variables could be included in the models
to estimate unobservable parameters related to specic
persons. For example, the random eect in the sexual-
probabiliy model reects dierent levels of sexual activ-
ity between humans, which cannot be explained by age
or sexual orientation. This is an important feature of
the model as this approach allows for the extreme be-
havior as mentioned in the introduction with regard to
the ight attendant.
Overall, the coecients of 10 generalized linear mod-
els are used by the agents to determine their behav-
ior. 6 models for the daily probability of a sexual
contact of heterosexual, gay and lesbian singles and
couples have been estimated using a 4-parameter b-
distribution. Weibull-distributions have been used to
model the time of a relationship and the time of be-
ing single. And nally, a multinomial logit-model was
estimated for the contraception-use of the agents. All
parameters of the according distributions are estimated
using the GAMLSS-package [17] or mlogit-package [10]
for R [16].
Table 2.4., as an example for the behavior estimatation,
shows the decision rule for ending a relationship. The
duration of a relationship can be seen as a survival anal-
ysis problem using a Weibull distribution. Estimated
from the PAIRFAM-dataset, sex, sexual-orientation and
the age at the beginning of a relationship showed to be
signicantly associated with the survival-time or dura-
tion of the relationship in 26,046 relationships. The co-
ecients from table 2.4. are used in the C-code for the
agent behavior at the rst day of a new relationship. The
agents take their own age, sex and sexual orientation
value from their value set and multiply them with the
corresponding coecient values for m(shape-parameter
of the Weibull distribution) and s(scale parameter), re-
spectively. Afterwards, the day at which the relationship
will end is drawn randomly from a Weibull-distribution
with these specic scale and shape parameter and stored
in the agent memory. At the beginning of each day, the
agent checks whether the day of break-up is equal to the
current day and if that condition holds, the agent will
send a break-up message to its partner.
The possibility of computational parallelization in the
FLAME-framework as well as in the software tool pro-
grammed for the creation of the starting population al-
lows for acceptable run-times for large populations of 1Survival time of
relationships
m
Intercept :010(:028)
Male  :545(:013)
Homosexual  :684(:071)
Interaction (male:homosexual) :263(:124)
ps(Age at beginn of relationship) :101(:001)
s
Intercept :623(:025)
Male :098(:013)
Homosexual :289(:078)
Interaction (male:homosexual)  :240(:123)
ps(Age at beginn of relationship)  :027(:001)
Num. obs. 26046
Nagelkerke R2:988
Generalized AIC 88444: 695
p<0:001,p<0:01,p<0:05
Table 1 . Results of Weibull GLM to model the suvival-time of
relationships using a log-link function for mands.
million agents ( 8 minutes on a standard-workstation).
Nevertheless, these run-times come at the cost of some
simplications concerning the agent behavior. Firstly,
childbirth does not follow a planned pregnancy with un-
derlying sociological theories or economic utility func-
tions, but is rather modeled as a more fateful result of not
using contraception. Secondly, there is no sophisticated
matching algorithm applied (as described in [21]) to form
agent relationships or match single sexual contacts. If
the model shows an improved run-time on high perfor-
mance computers these features can be implemented in
the code.
3. PRELIMINARY RESULTS
The SILAS model is still under development with re-
gard to its nal goal of simulating the disease spread of
syphilis in the complete German population. The de-
velopment process is carried out using a population of
100,000 agents. Due to the various behavior functions
estimated from dierent datasets included in the model,
interim model outputs are used for step-by-step valida-
tion of the dierent behavior rules.
To draw conclusions from the SILAS model about the
transmission of STIs, a valid depiction of a populations
sexual behavior needs to be implemented. The number
of births, as a result of the sexual and contraceptual
behavior, might be an indicator if the number of sexual
contacts between agents and the usage of contraception
methods are valid. Therefore the age-specic fertility
rates (ASFR), dened as births per 100,000 women in
the same age, produced by the model are compared to
the ASFR of the German population.
As can be seen in gure 3 the model ASFR approximates
the observed ASFR in Germany with slightly higher
rates in women under 25 years and slightly lower rates
in the age group over 40 years of age. Deviations may
be due to the stochastic nature of the model in combina-
tion of the relatively small agent population of 100,000
agents. Furthermore, the share of women being single at
the time of birth is relatively small.
4050100150
15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Age in yearsAge−specific fertility rateRelationship status
Partners
SinglesFigure 3 .Demographic results: The ﬁgure depicts the age-
speciﬁc fertility rate within and outside of relationships produced
by the model in the ﬁrst year of the simulation in contrast to the
observed German age-speciﬁc fertility rate (green line).
Using the ASFR as indicator for the realistic sexual be-
havior of the agents, it can be concluded that the fre-
quency of sexual contacts and contraception methods
used by the agents correspond to the German popula-
tion, thus allowing a realistic simulation of STI spread. It
should be pointed out again, that the implementation of
the behavior rules on the agent-level leads to valid results
on the population-level without any behavior-controlling
feedback-loop between agent- and population-level. In-
fertility, age-specic conception probabilities, induced
and spontaneous abortions show to have a relevant ef-
fect on the birth rates in this context.
4. FUTURE WORK AND PLANNED EXTENSIONS
As the transmission of STIs is modeled similarly to preg-
nancy, the agent-based nature of the SILAS model allows
for a very detailed analysis of the transmission paths. At
this stage of development only a simplied disease model
of syphilis based on assumed transition and transmission
probabilities is implemented in the SILAS model. Nev-
ertheless the model already allows to see the potential in
analyzing dierent types of outbreaks using the memory
variables of the agents to stratify the transmissions of
STIs into hetero-, homo- or bisexual infections as well
as mother-to-child infection. A graphical representation
of these transmission types is shown in gure 4. With
syphilitic agents of the starting population at time-point
zero (time in month on the x-axis) infections between
agents are represented by arrows ending at the month in
which the infection took place. The sex of the agent is
shown by its color so arrow connecting dierent colored
dots represent heterosexual transmission of syphilis. Us-
ing this type of analysis can allow to identify agents with
similar value sets of their memory correlated to being es-
pecially vulnerable to syphilis infections or being at risk
of being a spreader of the disease.
The SILAS model can be easily extended to other STIs
than syphilis as only an additional memory variable for
Syphilis infection dynamics by month
red=male, black=female, dashed line = mother−child−inf0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12Figure 4 .Disease spread between agents: Each node rep-
resents an agent, arrows denote infections between the agents over
time.
an agent is needed. This would allow the inclusion
of interactions between certain diseases and the mod-
eling of change of agent behavior after the diagnosis of
a serious disease like HIV. Another planned extension
is the regional distribution of agents across the 16 fed-
eral states of Germany to model the regional spread of
STIs and to incorporate dierent demographic and sex-
ual orientation-specic structure of the states or regions.
In addition, sex workers as multipliers in the spread of
STIs can be incorporated in the model.
5. CONCLUSION
The SILAS model seems to provide a valid foundation for
analyses in the context of epidemiological, public health
and health technology assessment in the eld of infec-
tious diseases. The agent-based approach provides a tool
to identify special patterns of the STI spread thus allow-
ing the evaluation of tailored interventions or the eect of
health care utilization (e.g. time to diagnosis). Planned
extensions to the model include a regional distribution
of agents and the inclusion of sex workers as important
parameters to disease spread.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Stefan Scholz likes to thank Verena Vogt, Jacob Barhak
and Tony Hunt for their valuable comments on the
paper, and Jacob Barhak for the invitation of this paper
and to the population modeling working groups mailing
list. This paper uses data from the German Family
Panel pairfam, coordinated by Josef Bruederl, Karsten
Hank, Johannes Huinink, Bernhard Nauck, Franz Neyer,
and Sabine Walper. pairfam is funded as long-term
project by the German Research Foundation (DFG).The
comments during the review process of Tony Hunt and
Jacob Barhak are available via https://groups.google.
com/forum/#!topic/public-scientific-reviews/iZxMTDFhNYw
and https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/
public-scientific-reviews/ZJWBZd4Mz1Q.
5REFERENCES
1. Auerbach, D. M., Darrow, W. W., Jae, H. W.,
and Curran, J. W. Cluster of Cases of the Acquired
Immune Deciency Syndrome. The American
Journal of Medicine 76 , March 1964 (1984),
487{492.
2. Barrett, J. C., and Marshall, J. The Risk of
Conception on Dierent Days of the Menstrual
Cycle. Population Studies 23, 3 (1969), 455{461.
3. Batram, M., and Scholz, S. Intention action, 2014.
4. Coakley, S., Smallwood, R., and Holcombe, M.
Using X-Machines as a Formal Basis for Describing
Agents in Agent-Based Modelling. Proceedings of
the 2006 Agent-Directed Simulation Conference
(2006), 33{40.
5. Colombo, B., and Masarotto, G. Daily
Fecundability: First Results from a New Data
Base. Demographic Research 3, 5 (Sept. 2000).
6. de La Rochebrochard, E., and Thonneau, P.
Paternal age and maternal age are risk factors for
miscarriage; results of a multicentre European
study. Human Reproduction 17 , 6 (June 2002),
1649{1656.
7. Federal Statistical Oce. Number of induced
abortions 2013. Tech. rep., Federal Statistical
Oce, Wiesbaden, Germany, 2014.
8. Gnoth, C. Time to pregnancy: results of the
German prospective study and impact on the
management of infertility. Human Reproduction 18 ,
9 (Sept. 2003), 1959{1966.
9. Gray, R. T., Hoare, A., McCann, P. D., Bradley, J.,
Down, I., Donovan, B., Prestage, G., and Wilson,
D. P. Will changes in gay men's sexual behavior
reduce syphilis rates? Sexually transmitted diseases
38, 12 (Dec. 2011), 1151{8.
10. Henningsen, A., and Toomet, O. maxLik: A
package for maximum likelihood estimation in R.
Computational Statistics 26, 3 (2011), 443{458.11. Huinink, J., Br uderl, J., Nauck, B., Walper, S.,
Castiglioni, L., and Feldhaus, M. Panel Analysis of
Intimate Relationships and Family Dynamics
(pairfam): Conceptual framework and design.
Zeitschrift f ur Familienforschung - Journal of
Family Research 23 (2011), 77{101.
12. Mattei, P. L., Beachkofsky, T. M., Gilson, R. T.,
and Wisco, O. J. Syphilis: A Reemerging Infection.
Americam Family Physician 86 , 5 (2012), 433{440.
13. Nauck, B., Br uderl, J., Huinink, J., and Walper, S.
The German Family Panel (pairfam), 2014.
14. Nybo Andersen, A.-m., Wohlfahrt, J., Christens,
P., and Melbye, M. Maternal age and fetal loss:
population based register linkage study. BMJ
General practice 320 , 24 June (2000), 1708{1712.
15. Ospina, R., and Ferrari, S. L. P. Inated beta
distributions. Statistical Papers 51 , 1 (Mar. 2008),
111{126.
16. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for
Statistical Computing, 2014.
17. Rigby, R. A., and Stasinopoulos, D. M. Generalized
additive models for location, scale and shape,(with
discussion). Applied Statistics 54, 3 (2005), 507{554.
18. Robert Koch Institute. SurvStat@RKI 2.0, 2014.
19. Rompalo, A., and Cates, W. Syphilis. In Bacterial
Infections of Humans , E. Brachman, Philip S.;
Abrutyn, Ed., 4th ed. Springer, New York, USA,
2009, ch. 36, 783{801.
20. Software Engineering Group. FLAME, 2014.
21. Stephensen, P. SBAM: An Algorithm for Pair
Matching. 2012.
22. Wilcox, A. J., Weinberg, C. R., and Baird, D. D.
Timing of Sexual Intercourse in Relation to
Ovulation. The New England Journal of Medicine
333, 23 (1995), 1517{1521.
6