Race and Gender in Play Practices: 
Young African American Males 
Betsy DiSalvo 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
School of Interactive Computing 
85 5th Street NW 
Atlanta, GA, USA  
bdisalvo@cc.gatech.edu  
 Amy Bruck man 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
School of Interactive Computing 
85 5th Street NW 
Atlanta, GA, USA  
asb@cc.gatech.edu  
   
ABSTRACT  
In this paper we present a study with young African American 
men, to gain a better understanding of the impacts of cultural and 
gender identity on play practices and to explore the relationship between cultural play practices and interest in computing. Our findings indicate that while young African American men play video games frequently, their objectives in playing may be unlike 
those who enter computer scientist fields . From this we discuss 
implications of this study on designing CS learning interventions that leverage video games to introduce young people to computation.   
 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.2 [ Computers and Education ]: Computer and Information 
Science Education - computer science education. 
K.8.0  [Personal Computing ]: General – games . 
 
General Terms 
Design, Experimentation, Human Factors 
Keywords  
Agency, African American, Gender, Video Games  
1. INTRODUCTION 
With respect to using games for learning goals, Kurt Squire suggests that cultural and player practices should be an emphasis of study [43]. However, as Gaily [14], Ito and Bittani [21], and 
Leonard [34] have noted there has been little exploration of race 
in game studies, and even less that explores the intersection o f 
race and gender with gaming. While several studies have looked 
at this intersection from the perspective of game content and character representation [6,49], little is known about player 
practices, as Squire suggests.  
In this paper we present a study with young African American 
men, to gain a better understanding of the impacts of cultural and gender identity on play practices and to explore the relationship between cultural play practices and interest in computing. We discuss implications of this study on designing CS learning interventions that leverage video games to introduce young people 
to computation.  
This study was part of exploratory work in developing a learning 
intervention that leveraged young African American men’s passion for video games into an interest in computing. The resulting learning intervention, the Glitch Game Testers project, is discussed in detail in other literature [8]. 
2. Background  
Video games provide a unique opportunity for researchers to make connections between different groups, such as African American males’ interaction with technology. First, the practice of 
playing video games is ubiquitous among all young people in America today, but particularly passionate about games are young African American men and young men who choose computer 
science careers. Second, video games are powerful pieces of 
computation that often inspire wonder and are self-reported as 
being a major influence on computer scientist interest in computing. Finally, there are differences in play practices among different groups that can help us understand how young people situate technology in their lives, which will help us design better, 
more culturally appropriate interventions. 
2.1 Who is Playing? 
Although we have a informal idea of who is playing games, survey data suggest the answer to the question is more complex. The Entertainment Software Association has reported annually on the changing demographics of gamers. Their message stresses that games are no longer (if the ever were) played only by adolescent 
Caucasian and Asian men. These reports and others provide data that video games are being played by over 90% of children and are consumed by Americans across all classes, cultures, genders, and ages [12,41] .  
There is a fundamental message across all of the analyses: at least casual use and contact with video games is prevalent across 
specific demographics regarding race, class, and gender. With 
97% of young people in America reporting some use of video games [41], we can now say playing video games are part of 
growing up in America for everyone. But some groups are using 
games more frequently. Reports indicate that young African American and Hispanic men play games more hours per day than 
any other demographic [29,41] .  
 
56
Permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee. 
FDG 2010, June 19-21, Monterey, CA, USA 
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-937-4/10/06... $10.002.2 Computer Science and Gaming 
The possible relationship between playing computer games and an 
interest in CS has been of particular interest to researchers 
considering gender inequities in CS [2,5,27] . Research by the 
American Association of University Women suggested that young men’s more frequent video game play had led more men into technology careers than women, and suggested that we get girls gaming to help increase the number of women in technology fields [1]. This recommendation led, directly and indirectly, to a 
number of outreach and research projects to focus on developing girls’ interest in gaming and making games [13,17,24,48]. 
Research based on computer scientist s’ biographical stories and 
ethnographic research with CS majors and young enthusiasts 
demonstrates that many attribute some of their initial interest in 
computing to playing video games [4,36,42] . This suggests that 
video games are an important cultural artifact in the development of computer scientist. However, while in these studies computer 
scientists often self-report ed that video games led to their interest 
in computing, a survey conducted with over 1,000 students at a technical university indicates that there is only a small relationship between the hours spent playing  video games and 
interest in computing [9]. In the same survey, students answered an open-ended question, “How did video games affect your 
interest in computing?” In response, 45% of the students said that video games increased their interest in computing. T hose 
computer science majors who reported that games affected their interest in computing had specific play practices around gaming, rather than more hours gaming. These play practices correspond with biographical stories and ethnographic research with 
computer scientists about their video game play practices 
impacting an interest in computing.  
The survey identified several gaming practices and attitudes that 
were more likely to be found among CS majors, including a desire 
to make games, understand the mathematics of gaming, or hacking and modifying games. These play practices can be 
correlated with the stereotype of an obsessive gamer as a Caucasian or Asian male who create, modify and hack video 
games. Perhaps one reason for this stereotype is that these groups 
were first-adaptors of games and game culture. This stereotype 
may also be influenced by Caucasian and Asian males’ dominance in the production of games.   
To better understand who is making games, we reviewed the 
3,349 responses to survey data published in 2005 by the 
Independent Game Developers Association (IDGA) on game 
developers’ demographics [15,20]. We found that the data 
reflected some aspects of the make up of society, but contrasted 
with others. The data indicates the American game industry is 79.4% white, which is in line with 80% of the American population being white [47]. However, it also indicates that 3.64% of the game developers are African American , compared with an 
estimated 12.8% of the American population that is African 
American [47] . And one group, Asian ethnicities, are over-
represented in the game development industry (8%) compared to 
their representation in the United States as a whole (4%) [47]. The 
gender distribution was 86.6% male and only 13.4% female.  Demographically speaking, the game development industry better represents who we think is gaming the most (Caucasian and Asian American males), rather than who is actually gaming the most (African and Latino American males). 2.3 Differences in Play Practices 
Ito and Bittani [21] express concerns about the lack of scholarship 
regarding video game play practices  in relationship to race, 
ethnicity, and socio-economic status. Research that does explore differences in play practices is often situated in contrasting gender differences. Research that does look at race at the race, ethnicity and cultural representation of game characters and the online development of “black” or minority characters does not explicitly 
address play practices.  
The lack of gender diversity in the game industr y and technology 
fields has led to a number of studies to understand how females 
play, but there has been little focus on masculinity [32] . Part of 
this is due to an assumption that studies of gaming practices and 
game content are normally conducted through a masculine lens. 
Within these studies, masculinity is an implied homogeneous perspective rather than explicitly identified as a cultural factor, 
with unique behaviors and values in different cultures.   
Research on gender and gaming has shown us that cultural factors 
impact the genre of games played and the way that games are played [5,25]. This work on gender and gaming has almost exclusively addressed the female or feminine qualities as the “other” in game studies. The findings are complex and sometimes contradictory, but much of the early work addressed the negative and objectified female images in games through content analysis 
[6,50]. Other work has looked at different practices of game play 
comparing preferences for game play along gender lines [16,26] .  
There has also been research on encouraging females to contribute to making and playing games [17,24], to increase their interest in games, study their gaming preferences, and to create a desire 
among girls to pursue interests in computing and technology.  
With such market saturation among all young people, we would 
expect to see diversity in the games that are produced. Some attempts to quantify the diversity of games have focused upon the number and type of minority and female characters in games.  At least two studies have given a comprehensive and slightly 
different take on the racial demographics in game.  In 2001, 
Children Now, a commun ity-based organization, provided 
demographics on characters in video games that suggest there is an under-representation of black characters. Those that are in games are generally sports figures or characters that promote negative stereotypes of African American males as aggressive and 
violent [6,32] .   
The second study, a recent “census” of gaming characters, is a content analysis of the characters’ impact on the general 
experience in playing video games, weighted by the popularity of 
games and the status of a character as human- or computer- 
controlled [49]. In this analysis, black characters represented 
10.7% of all characters in the game, and most of these characters 
are male. In relation to the population of 12.8% African 
Americans estimated by the 2000 US Census [47], this number would suggest that black males are over-represented in games.  
However, because the survey heavily weighted sports games such as Madden NFL  and NBA , which are among the biggest sellers in 
the game industry, most of the African American characters are 
sports figures that are representations of real people. These 
popular sports games have a large percentage of African American characters because they base the characters on real life players; for example, in 2006, 67% of National Football League 
players were African American [30] .  
57From this survey, we can identify that while there are black male 
game characters, they are most often sports figures that are already known to the players. What does this mean for young African American men playing games?  Because some of the most popular games with young black men are sports games [32], we 
can speculate that they are often playing black characters. With 
African American’s low representation in the game industry, it not surprising that the most appealing video games are directly correlated to real people and existing games that happen to have crossover between cultures. Sports games such as golf were not as 
popular with the young African American men we interviewed 
because they did not have a preexisting interest in golf .  
It may be that the games that young black men are playing are 
simply virtual representations of what is already happening in the real world. They may see the football player, not the game maker, 
as the person to emulate.  
For many games, particularly online games, the issues of a 
characters’ race would seem to be eliminated with player-created 
characters. But work by Kafai, Cook and Fields [23] outlines how 
the lack of premade avatar parts in online communities limits the number of options for players of color. Higgin [18] examines the lack of “black” or minority characters in online games and the privileged whiteness as the default settings in character creation. Leonard has further explored the studies of characters and the lack of discourse on race and the larger implications of ignoring “black and brown” characters in games [33]. Nakamura [38] has 
examined racist practices in gaming associated with gold farmers 
in World of Warcraft . While all of this research is informative of 
race and ethnicity through critical reviews of games content and 
characters, it does not specifically address the play practices that 
may be based upon race and ethnicity.  
2.4 Previous Study  
In an exploratory study in 2006, researchers conducted group 
interviews and observations at a summer youth program that 
served middle school children in an economically disadvantaged 
neighborhood in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania [10] . The participants 
were African American males between the ages of 11 and 14.  
In these observations and interviews, DiSalvo et al. found that the 
young African American men’s play practices differed from observations of young Caucasian men. These differences centered 
around five primary findings. The subjects tended to: 
• Begin playing video games younger. 
• Play more often with parents or adult family members .  
• Play competitively with others in-room (rather than online). 
• Consider games similar to / extension of competitive sports. 
• Use fewer modifications, hacks, Easter eggs and cheats
1. 
The study suggested further research with individual interview, directed to play practices. 
3. METHODS 
In order to extend this study and gain a better understanding of African American male video game play practices, we deployed a survey and conducted observations with 17 participants. We were able to conduct follow up interviews with 13 of them about their 
gaming practices. These students were all African American 
males, living in Atlanta, Georgia, and in an older age range, 15–
                                                                   
 
1 In the context of this paper these activities are referred to as modding and 
cheating see Consalvo [7] , for a review of game cheating.  17. They were attending schools that had a 99% African 
American student body and over 70% of students received free or 
reduced lunches.  
The students were participants in an after-school program about 
jobs in game testing. A high school teacher and after-school program coordinators recruited the students, who self-selected into the program. We first gave the students a survey to gather 
demographic information and general information about their 
gaming habits. We conducted observations while students played one of two games: Madden NFL  on a PlayStation 2 console 
during one afternoon session, or Fusion Fall
2 on a personal 
computer during six afternoon sessions.  
Interviews were conducted with 13 of the participants after the 
after-school program concluded. These interviews were held in 
environments in which students would feel comfortable, including after-school clubs, the local library, and fast food restaurants near their high schools.  Interviews were open-ended questions about 
gaming, computer use and after-school programs in which the 
students participated. The interview lengths ranged from 24 
minutes to 52 minutes, with the average time being 40 minutes .  
In analyzing the interview data, we first coded for specific 
references to 19 items.  We developed this coding scheme to help 
organize the analysis.  First, we identified codes from themes found in previous studies; for example, we had identified cheating and sports as themes that had provided information about students’ interaction with games in previous studies.  Second, we created codes for items that specifically addressed educational goals, such as technology and problem solving. Finally, we included other items in the coding when they repeatedly occurred 
in the transcripts, for example, the use of terms to describe creativity or anger. The 19 items we coded to organize the 
interview transcripts were: 
• Anger  
• Creativity  
• Competition  
• Confidence  
• Escaping 
from reality  
• Experienc e 
• Family  • Friends  
• Level 
up/unlocking  
• Maturity  
• Modding/ 
cheating  
• Online  
• Other priorities  • Single player  
• Skillful gaming  
• Social  
• Sports  
• Talk 
• Technology/problem 
solving  
 
 
To further organize the transcripts, we took each text associated 
with each of the 19 items and analyzed it through the perspective of three themes. The first theme examined how students expressed their feelings about video games in their life and as a reflection of themselves. The second theme considered how the students expressed their experience with technology, computation and gaming. The third theme explored how students expressed their social experience with game. 
4. FINDINGS 
4.1 Survey 
Seventeen students completed surveys. In the survey, students provided information about their current interests, future goals and gaming habits. This survey was an opportunity for us to 
                                                                   
 
2 Fusion Fall  is a massive multiplayer game for children, produced by 
Cartoon Network. We were given free access to the prerelease version 
of the game for students to play by Cartoon Network.   
58gather baseline information on the interests and goals of the 
students, and to situate the richer interview data. Our major 
findings centered around education and video game use.  
4.1.1 Education & School Life 
We found the students were in some agreement about their 
favorite school subject, with ten reporting math as their favorite subject, and three listing Language Arts. The remaining four students reported Art, Social Studies, Personal Fitness and no 
favorite subject. There was less agreement on the least favorite 
subject, although Math appears to be polarized with five students reporting that Math was their least favorite subject. Language Arts (4), Science (3), Art (2), and Social Studies (1) were all also reported as least favorite subjects and two students reported that they did not have a least favorite subject. All of the students 
intended to seek additional education after high school, college or trade school. When asked, “What will you be doing at the age of 
30?” eight students reported they intended to be professional 
athletes, three intended to be working with technology, three planned on working as artist or musicians, and two intended to be 
entrepreneurs .   
4.1.2 Video Games 
Participants in general favored sports games and shooters. Nine 
students reported sports games, Madden NFL  or NBA , being their 
favorite game. Four students reported their favorite game was a 
shooter or war game, such as Gears of War , Assassin’s Creed , and 
Gun. Three students listed anime-style fighting games, 
Dragonball  and Soul Calibur , and one student reported Burnout , a 
racing game. Students reported playing an average of seven hours 
per week, with all students playing at least one hour per week. All students reported that they preferred playing with friends and 13 students reported that socializing while they played video games was “important” or “very important”. Eleven students reported that they play online. Of the 17 students who participated in the written survey, six students reported that they used cheats when 
playing games. 
4.2 
Observations  
Console game play preferences seemed to align with the designed 
intentions of use. We noted that students often played together, competing on the console games. There were open console game 
systems, but the students preferred to play Madden NFL  against 
each other at the same console. More surprising was their choice to often watch each other play Fusion Fall , rather than playing 
with each other from different desktops.  Because the game is an online multiplayer game, students had the option to play from 
their own desktop with their friends in the virtual world of Fusion 
Fall. However, the students often chose to watch over each 
other’s shoulder and talk, rather than sitting across from each 
other and viewing the game from their own screens .   
We observed students participating in loud, humorous, and 
continuous talk during game play. They commented on the way other players looked, progressed, and performed in the game and frequently made references between their online play and their real world appearance or athletic performance. This talk was ongoing and often was coupled with bragging. The students referred to this as “trash talk” and “smack talk”. It was similar to the banter that one would find in friendly, casual, physical games.  
Madden NFL  was a game that all of the students were acquainted 
with. They chose to compete in one-off games rather than developing a team. This may be due to the single session of 
observation, but in our interviews, students noted that pulling out 
memory cards when playing sports games is a common practice. Students felt that it was fairer  that way, and others could not cheat 
by developing a character’s attributes. The talk was often about 
the real life football players and teams that were represented in the 
game. The students went to great lengths to talk about how it was 
just like real football, and rarely noted how the video game play 
was different than a physical game of football. 
Fusion Fall  was the first massive multiplayer game that the 
students had played. The students did not immediately understand 
how to “level up” or the more complex elements of the game economy. However, after the first session they seemed to understand how the game was organized, and began advancing rapidly. They had little interest in exploring the rich world made up of Cartoon Network references and characters, and rarely 
mentioned the characters except during the startup, when short 
video clips were shown. They did know, and seemed to like, many of the cartoon characters. Their primary concern was with advancing faster than the each other. When one student had advanced much further than the other students, due to extra time 
playing, the competitive nature and interest in the game fell off.   
4.3 Interviews 
The interviews highlighted a number of ways that the students’ 
identity is defined, partially, by their racial identity. Particularly, 
being African American seemed to play a significant part in their construction of masculinity. While students did not display any overt awareness of a racial identity, there were indications of racial identity in the trash talk, the emphasis on athleticism and sportsmanship, their lack of emphasis on agency with the game technology, the movies and music they referenced, and the characters they chose to play in video games.  In this section, we 
will outline our findings from the interviews with a focus on the 
competition, sports, technology, and socializing with games.  
4.3.1 Confidence and Competition 
Consistent among all 13 interviews, students expressed feelings of 
confidence and skillfulness with games. Some of them associated 
their game play with personal traits such as creativity. As Darnel3 
explained, “I have the creative side, the challenge side, and I have 
the mature side , which gives me the advantage.” 
It was apparent that being competitive against others and the game 
itself was of value to the students. Jamal expressed this by 
bragging about his skillfulness compared to other players. “If a friend come over, and like say you just playing…I wan to put my 
friend inside [the game] and beat him.”   
Most of the students talked about their competitive nature with 
pride. They felt that being competitive reflected well on them as a person who likes a challenge and is not afraid of difficult things. As Devan described, “I am a competitive person. I like to play against somebody …If I am playing against somebody, I am a competitive person…I like to win, so I like to play other folks 
then.” 
4.3.2 Different Reality 
More than half of the students commented that games allowed 
them to express feelings or actions they couldn’t express in real 
                                                                    
3 All students’ names have been changed. 
59life, or about games being different than reality. Some commented 
about playing games such as Grand Theft Auto  that allowed them 
to act out without any real world repercussions. Some commented 
on interacting with characters, such as football players, that they would never get to meet or play in real life.  The common theme 
among these students’ examples was an escape from reality. As 
Antwan explained, “I like playing games because you can steal cars, shoot stuff, and blow stuff up. You can’t do that in the real 
world. In games, it is nice you don’t have any consequences.”  
Similar to escaping reality by doing things in games that they 
could or would not do in reality, a few students talked about games providing a way to express anger. Interestingly, none of the students reflected on shooter or fighting games as a way to virtually express anger. While they played these games, they 
always talked about them with a bit of humor, understanding that 
the absurdity of games like Fight Night  and Grand Theft Auto  was 
part of the fun of playing them.  When talking about expressing real feelings—in this case, anger—Jamal referred to Madden  
NFL: “It’s fun, and it’s a way to get away from…. from stress in 
stuff. Like in Madden, you hit somebody real hard and it’s 
like…ooh, I got him. Hit him just real.”  
4.3.3 
 Sports and Sportsmanship  
Our interviews support earlier findings that young African 
American men  do not treat virtual sports and real sports similarly . 
Sekayi expressed that games were an additional way to play sports: “I go outside, me and my brother, we play football. Then everybody is just playing football. And then, I just like, when I go into the house I get that urge and then I just want to play more football…so I just pop in a sports game.” Darnel believed that 
real-world football knowledge helped one’s game play in video 
football games: “When you don’t feel like getting up physically 
playing, like with your body and stuff…You got to know how to 
play football, and you got to know everything about Madden in 
order to succeed.”  
Just as in sports, the students put a high value on sportsmanship.  
The use of modifications, cheats, and strategy guides were limited 
in to use in non-sports games.  As Sekayi explained in his use of cheats and modifications, “Yeah, in other games like adventure games, I use cheat codes like extra health, infinity health, all the moves...but most sports games I haven't seen any Easter eggs, or 
cheat codes.” 
Some students chose not to use cheats in any game. Xavier 
explained this choice as a reflection of his character and gaming skills: “I don’t use cheat codes anymore. I found out that cheat 
codes are just really cheap. I mean I want to beat the game, and I 
don’t want to be a cheater.” 
In sports games, the definition of cheating was extended; any sort 
of modification to the game was considered cheating. When we 
asked Charles about using cheats in his favorite game, NBA ,  he 
was embarrassed to admit to switching sides when playing when 
playing alone if his team was far behind. Charles said, “The cheat, it says like options, then I go to that, and then you can switch sides.  That is pretty much what I do.” And Sekayi commented that the standard for playing sports games was to remove all 
memory cards so that no player had more experienced characters.  
4.3.4 
Technology, Computation and Gaming  
Contrasting earlier findings, most of the students play ed online 
games, and many had high-speed Internet access. Rather than computers with Internet access, however, we found that most had 
Internet access through their cable television provider to enable online play on console game systems like Xbox and PlayStation  2. 
Only three participants had access at home to a personal computer that had an Internet connection.  One student had access to a 
networked computer at his grandmother’s home where he spent 
time frequently, and one participant had a computer with no Internet access. Even those three with computers and Internet access had limited access to the computers. As Charles explained, “My mom has the AOL, and she has to put the Internet cord into 
it. I only use the internet cord for Xbox.”  
We asked about technical problems and probed students about 
learning computing skills from gaming or setting up gaming systems. The students did not report any other personal 
experiences with technical issues or learning.  
4.3.5 Social Experience with Games 
Social play was important, not in connecting with strangers 
online, but with known associates in the room. Many students played games exclusively with family members. Students 
provided many examples of playing with male friends, brothers, male cousins, uncles, and fathers, but only one student mentioned 
playing with a female, his “auntie .”  
Darnel expressed that games were a way to bridge age gaps with 
family members: “I got friends and family and stuff that play games and we have competitions…Even my dad still plays games. 
I play games with my dad, my older cousin, he is what, like 
twenty-five or something.”  
A few students commented on social pressure to play Madden 
NFL. They indicated that it was not a favorite game, but they 
played and practiced to keep up with their friends. Xavier 
mentioned that he had started playi ng Madden NFL  after his 
friends had mastered it: “I play sports games, mostly Madden , 
because I have to, with friends.” 
Over half of the students said that they preferred to play alone at 
times . The deciding factor in playing alone was the type of game. 
Action and adventure games were solitary pursuits, while sports 
games were social. However, those that played action and adventure games online with other people still considered this 
playing “alone.”  As Antwan explained, “When you play on the 
computer (online) you don’t get any good feedback. When you play with your friends (in the room), you get little smart 
comments from your friends and stuff.”  
Dion expressed similar discontent with online play: “I play 
differently than people around me (online). I am a team player, I think everyone online, they leave people and don’t make sure everyone gets their experience (points in the game).” Xavier was one of the few students who play ed online regularly. Even he had 
a number of reservations about playing online, because of unfair play and poor attitudes among other players. Xavier mentioned, 
“Fighting games, sometimes I like to play by myself, because 
people online, they talk a lot of trash.”  
5. 
DISCUSSION  
This study provides us a better understanding of the impacts o f 
cultural and gender identity on play practices of African American 
men, and helps us in exploring the relationship between play practices and interests in computing. The majority of efforts to address broadening participation in computing, including the use 
of games, have focused on gender issues with the goal of making 
60computing a more viable career for women. These research efforts 
have examined the differences in gender as opposing sides of a coin, masculine and feminine. Often studies only reflect on the “masculine” traits of gaming or computing culture as a contrast to 
the “feminine.” The literature shows that in the culture of 
computing, masculine traits such as competition, defensiveness, 
risk taking, and asocial behavior are encouraged. On the other side of the coin are feminine traits, such as being cooperative, open, risk-averse and social [3,36,45] . However, masculine and 
feminine identities are far more complex than this dichotomy. 
Gender identities are also situated in culture, race, age, socio-
economic status and geographic factors. Overlooking masculinity 
as its own unique and varied identity rather than the assumed 
norm is not unique to education and game studies, as Kimmel and 
Messner noted:  
Too often…we treat men as if they had no gender, as if only 
their public personae were of interest to us as students and scholars, as if their interior experience of gender was of no 
significance…Men often think of themselves as genderless, as 
if gender did not matter in the daily experiences... [28] 
By treating the problem as one of gender, without considering 
variations in the constructs of masculine identities, we are 
overlooking efforts to be more inclusive of African American 
males. 
Idealized masculine identities in CS and African American 
cultures have noted differences . We address these differences not 
because they reflect what all, or even most, computer scientist s’ or 
African Americans’ value, but because these masculine constructs 
are held up as something to attain, or to consciously reject. 
5.1 The Masculinity of Geeks 
The masculine identity within CS has been examined by a number 
of researchers conducting qualitative fieldwork with college 
students, notably Margolis and Fisher [36] and Turkle [44] . 
However, with some exceptions [11,22], the intersection of race 
and gender has not been a significant factor in these CS education 
studies. As Margolis and Fisher [36] report there simply were not 
enough number of African Americans CS majors at Carnegie 
Mellon University to make any findings trustworthy and credible. While Turkle [46] does not explicitly address race, one can 
interpret from her description of “pale faced” geeks, that most of 
the students she was studying at MIT were white.  
Margolis and Fisher speak to the pressure for women in the CS 
department to fit in with masculine identity traits. One trait required is early and intense passion for computing. Men in their interviews spoke about how they valued their early exposure and tinkering with computers. It was often how they spent most of their time, playing around and taking things apart.  They identify 
this as the “magnetic attraction” that some young men feel for 
computers. This attraction leads them to early experimentation, development of communities of practice, and skills with computing that others entering into CS may lack. It is something 
they boast about. While their pride in their abilities maybe rightfully placed, it places those who don’t have this early passion as the “other” in computing culture. This means students identify two types of CS majors, those that are connected to computing 
and the “others”, those who did not experiment and participate in 
communities of practice. These outsiders to CS often come from homes, cultures, or have a gender identity where early and 
frequent exposure to computing was not encouraged or expected.  In Levy’s [35] book Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution , 
he presents an idealized version of the founding fathers of CS. According to Levy, this ideal hero is male and has little time for women or physical relationships, contending that they take precious time away from the idealized singular goal to be on the 
computer all the time. Many similar accounts of the computer 
geek rejecting the physical side of life for a more cerebral life are echoed across literate. Turkle’s account of the hacker identity at MIT in the 1980’s is a tribute to rejecting the body. She recounts the paradox that many of the CS majors feel about being in the physical world and having human relationships versus committing oneself to the mastery of the computer. In the world that Turkle describes, the big man on campus is not the all-around good guy, 
athlete, or the successful Don Juan. It is the one who rejects care 
for his body and appearance, relationships and sleep, all to devote 
himself to the higher calling of computation.   
5.2 Masculinity and African American Men 
Some constructs of African American masculinity have 
materialized through problematic mediatized depictions and 
racialization. Page argues that: 
racialized and gendered information inscribed in contemporary 
black male imagery is racially filtered through the media and 
trains the national audience to suspiciously regard and viscerally react to African American men's physical features 
and patterns of interaction.  [39] 
Pre-occupation with African American sexuality and bodies have 
also contributed to constructing an anti-intellectual depiction of African American masculinity. According to Richardson’s [40] 
reflections on black masculinity in the southern United States and scholarship on the African American image in athletics [19,37] , 
this strong identity with the body in athletic competition and sexuality can be traced from historic roots in American slavery through the racialization of athletics and science.   
Miller illumin ates how taxonomies of racism found in earlier 
scientific studies fed social and cultural attitudes regarding blacks’ 
athletic achievement. He points out variances and alterations in 
language when authors describe the athletic achievements of whites versus blacks. When writing about black dancers and athletes, authors often focused on the body and attributed extraordinary skills to innate abilities. Conversely, when highlighting whites accomplishments in dance and athletics, authors emphasized intellectual prowess, discipline, and fortitude 
as explanations [37]. 
These racialized body-centric models of African American 
masculinity have been repeated so often in media, literature, 
scientific discourse, and commentary that they have caused 
friction in identity construction within the African American community. Co-opting Eurocentric masculine identity has proven 
equally problematic for African American males because it ignores the traditional egalitarian int er-gendered relationships and 
the communal inter-generational relationships within the African American culture [31]. The boundaries of inclusion and exclusion 
marked in mainstream American “delineates the parameters of embraceable and unembraceable African American male 
subjectivity” [39] and invade the culture of CS as well. African 
American men struggle to construct a gender identity in the midst 
of these constant conflicts. As a result, negotiating between the norms and boundaries prescribed by the dominant culture, the 
values of an African American subculture, and the gender issues of African American masculinity often causes African American 
61men to seek mechanisms of survival and connectivity rather than 
agency and independency. The implications for this choice stand out in comparison to the geek culture where technological agency 
is a key signifier of masculinity.  
5.3 Race and Gender in Play Practices 
Our findings indicate that while young African American men 
play video games frequently, their objectives in playing may be unlike those who enter computing-related fields. They often played for social reasons: to connect with family, to practice for 
future social situations, and to have fun talking and “clowning” 
with their friends. They did not consider online interactions to be 
social ones . Video games were seen as something that was fixed, 
similar to TV, rather than a medium they could manipulate.  In 
this way, games were a medium. They used games not as a 
medium for online communication, but as a device that offered 
activities for socializing in the real world. 
These play practices align with the literature on African American 
masculinity and offer us some insights into interpreting the differences in play practices and technological agency between geeks and African American men. In this way the cultural experiences of athletics and sports, body-centric masculinity, and 
communal inter-generational relationships shape the play 
practices of many young African American men.  For the geek culture, the emphasis on agency with technology may shape the 
play practices, resulting in hacking, cheating, and modding. 
However, there are similarities in the masculine identities of both 
groups. A high value on competition and confidence in their skills with the devices were found in both identities. Closely tied to the high value on competition and confidence, both groups use game 
technology as a social lubricant.  
The participants’ Internet access through digital game platforms, 
rather than computers, may be tied to economic or class issues, but also may be a cultural artifact of the play preferences for console game systems which better accommodate in-room and 
inter-generational socialization play practices. In either case, the 
impact of playing online through console systems rather than 
personal computers results in greater barriers to agency with the 
computational aspects of games.  
6. FUTURE WORK 
The selection of video games as an artifact for exploring the 
identity constructs around technology was based upon their popularity among young African American men. We found that 
not only are video games popular, but game consoles often are the 
most powerful computational devices and the only Internet-enabled devices in our participants’ homes. Significantly, we 
found video game use was both social and gendered, suggesting that video game play practices can offer us a chance to observe construction of race, gender and technology identity with in a 
cultural context.  
Games can offer insights into the difference in identity and culture 
and how those differences contribute to construction of identity with technology. The close association with sports as a point of pride in manhood, versus computers scientists’ association with 
hacking and coding as masculine pursuits, gives us future research 
agendas to pursue regarding the intersection of masculine constructions and their impact on technology use across different 
cultural groups. This study has provided background for designing learning 
interventions that leverage not only technology, but also cultural values and practices. We have outlined four implications for examining cultural play practices when designing learning 
interventions with games:  
• Respect culture  – Seek to understand cultural differences in 
play practices and prioritize cultural values. 
• Affordances in play practices – Find opportunities for 
learning interventions in students’ current play practices. 
• Affordances in cultural values  – Find opportunities to 
support learning through the cultural value of games. 
Implications of the study have lead us to develop the Glitch Game Tester project [8]. The successful implementation of Glitch suggests that targeted studies of play practices and cultures of players can be a useful tool for designing future learning 
interventions with games.  
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This material is based upon work supported by the National 
Science Foundation under Grant No. CNS-0837733.  
8. REFERENCES 
[1] AAUW, TechSavvy: Educating girls in the new computer age. American Association of University Women (AAUW), Washington, DC, 2000.  
[2] Barker, L.J., Garvin-Doxas, K. and Jackson, M., "Defensive climate in the computer science classroom," 33rd SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education , 
ACM New York, NY, USA (2002), 43- 47. 
[3] Barron, B., "Learning Ecologies for Technologiecal Fluency: Gender and experience differences " Journal of Educational Computing Research 31, 1 (2004), 1- 36. 
[4] Cassell, J. and Jenkins, H., From Barbie to Mortal Kombat: Gender and Computer Games. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts - London, England, 1998. 
[5] Children Now, Fair play: Violence, gender and race in video 
games. Children NOW, Berkeley, CA, 2001.  
[6] Consalvo, M., Cheating: Gaining Advantage in Videogames . 
Mit Press, 2007. 
[7] DiSalvo, B., Guzdial, M., Mcklin, T., Meadows, C., Perry, 
K., Steward, C. and Bruckman, A. Glitch Game Testers: African American Men Breaking Open the Console DiGRA 2009 Breaking New Ground: Innovation in Games, Play, Practice and Theory, Digital Games Research Association Brunel, UK, 2009. 
[8] DiSalvo, B.J. and Bruckman, A., "Questioning Video Games ' 
Influence on CS Interest," Proceedings of Foundation of Digital Games (Bahamas, April 2009)  (2009). 
[9] DiSalvo, B.J., Crowley, K. and Norwood, R., "Learning in Context: Digital Games and Young Black Men," Games and 
Culture 3, 2 (2008), 131. 
[10] Eglash, R., "Race, Sex, and Nerds," Social Text 20 (2002), 
49-64. 
[11] Entertainment Software Association, E. 2008 Sales, 
Demographics and Usage Data: Essential facts about the computer and video game industry http://www.theesa.com/facts/pdfs/ESA_EF_2008.pdf, [Date Accessed, February 18, 2009], 2008. 
62[12] Flanagan, M., "Troubling'Games for Girls': Notes from the 
Edge of Game Design," Unpublished proceedings of Digital Games Research Association  (2005). 
[13] Gailey, C.W., "Mediated Messages: Gender, Class, and Cosmos in Home Video Games," Journal of Popular Culture 
27, 1 (1993), 81- 98. 
[14] Gourdin, A., Game developer demographics: An exploration 
of workforce diversity. International Game Developers 
Association, San Francisco, CA, 2005.  
[15] Greenfield, P.M., "Video Games as Cultural Artifacts," Interacting With Video  (1996). 
[16] Heeter, C., Egidio, R., Mishra, P. and Wolf, L., "Do girls prefer games designed by girls," Proceedings of DIGRA (Vancouver, June 2005)  (2005). 
[17] Higgin, T., "Blackless Fantasy: The Disappearance of Race in Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games," 
Games and Culture  (2008). 
[18] Hoberman, J.M., Darwin's Athletes: How Sport Has Damaged Black America and Preserved the Myth of Race . 
Houghton Mifflin, 1997. 
[19] International Game Developers Association, I. Game Industry Demographics Survey (File name: IGDA_Diversity-Survey_July05_Data.xls) http://www.igda.org/diversity/report.php [Date Accessed, February 18, 2 009], 2005. 
[20] Ito, M. and Bittani, M., Final Report: Gaming. University of 
California Berkeley, Berkeley, 2008.  
[21] Jackson, L.A., Zhao, Y., Kolenic Iii, A., Fitzgerald, H.E., Harold, R. and Von Eye, A., "Race, Gender, and Information 
Technology Use: The New Digital Divide," 
CyberPsychology & Behavior 11, 4 (2008), 437- 442. 
[22] Kafai, Y., Cook, M. and Fields, D., ""Blacks Deserve Bodies Too!" Design and Discussion about Diversity and Race in a Teen Virtual World," Games and Culture 5, 1 (2010), 43. 
[23] Kafai, Y.B., "Playing and Making Games for Learning: Instructionist and Constructionist Perspectives for Game Studies," Games and Culture 1, 1 (2006), 36. 
[24] Kafai, Y.B., Heeter, C., Denner, J. and Sun, J.Y. Beyond 
Barbie and Mortal Kombat: New Perspectives on Gender and 
Computer Games, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2008. 
[25] Kafai, Y.B. and Resnick, M., Constructionism in Practice: Designing, Thinking, and Learning in a Digital World. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1996. 
[26] Kelleher, C. and Pausch, R., "Using storytelling to motivate programming,"  (2007). 
[27] Kimmel, M.S. and Messner, M.A., Men's Lives. Allyn and 
Bacon, 1998. 
[28] Kolko, J., Strohm, C. Q. & Lonian, A. , Hispanics and Blacks game more. Forrester, Consumer Technographics North America, Boston, MA, 2003.  
[29] Lapchick, R., Ekiyor, B. and Ruiz, B., The 2006 Racial and Gender Report Card: National Football League. University of Central Florida, DeVos Sport Business Managment Program, 2007.  
[30] Lawrence-Webb, C., Littlefield, M. and Okundaye, J.N., 
"African American Intergender Relationships a Theoretical Exploration of Roles, Patriarchy, and Love," Journal of Black Studies 34, 5 (2004), 623- 639. [31] Leonard, D., "“Live in Your World, Play in Ours”: Race, Video Games, and Consuming the Other," SIMILE: Studies In Media & Information Literacy Education 3, 4 (2003), 1- 9. 
[32] Leonard, D., "Young, Black (& Brown) and Don't Give a Fuck: Virtual Gangstas in the Era of State Violence," Cultural Studies<=> Critical Methodologies 9, 2 (2009), 248. 
[33] Leonard, D.J., "Not a Hater, Just Keepin'It Real: The 
Importance of Race-and Gender-Based Game Studies," 
Games and Culture 1, 1 (2006), 83. 
[34] Levy, S., Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution . 
Penguin Books, 2001. 
[35] Margolis, J. and Fisher, A., Unlocking the Clubhouse: 
Women in Computing. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 2002. 
[36] Miller, P.B., "The Anatomy of Scientific Racism: Racialist Responses to Black Athletic Achievement," Journal of Sport 
History  25 (1998), 119- 151. 
[37] Nakamura, L., "Don't Hate the Player, Hate the Game: The 
Racialization of Labor in World of Warcraft," Critical Studies in Media Communication 26, 2 (2009), 128- 144. 
[38] Page, H.E., ""Black Male" Imagery and Media Containment of African American Men," American Anthropologist 99, 1 
(1997), 99- 111. 
[39] Richardson, R., Black Masculinity And the US South: From 
Uncle Tom to Gangsta. University of Georgia Press, Athens, 
2007.  
[40] Rideout, V., Roberts, D.F. and Foehr, U.G., "Generation M: 
Media in the Lives of 8-18 Year-olds," The Henry J. Kaiser 
Family Foundation  (2005). 
[41] Schulte, C. and Knobelsdorf, M. Attitudes towards computer science-computing experiences as a starting point and barrier to computer science Proceedings of the third international workshop on Computing education research, ACM, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 2007. 
[42] Squire, K., "Cultural framing of computer/video games," Game studies 2, 1 (2002), 1- 7. 
[43] Turkle, S., "Adolescence and identity:  Finding yourself in the machine," in The second self: Computers and the human 
spirit, Simon and Schuster, New York, NY, 1984, 137- 162. 
[44] Turkle, S., "Computational reticence: Why women fear the 
intimate machine," in Kramarae, C. (ed.) Technology and women’s voices: Keeping in touch, Routledge, New York, 1988, 41– 61. 
[45] Turkle, S., The Second Self: Computers and the human spirit. Simon & Schuster, Inc., New York, 1984. 
[46] U.S., C.B., Annual Estimates of the Population by Sex, Race, 
and Hispanic Origin for the United States: April 1, 2000 to 
July 1, 2007 US Census Bureau, Population Division, 2007.  
[47] Van Eck, R., "Using Games to Promote Girls' Positive Attitudes Toward Technology," Journal of Online Education 2, 3 (2006). 
[48] Williams, D., Martins, N., Consalvo, M. and Ivory, J., "The virtual census: Representations of gender, race and age in video games," New Media & Society 11, 5 (2009), 815. 
[49] Yates, S. and Littleton, K., "Understanding computer game cultures: A situated approach," Virtual gender: Technology, consumption and identity  (2001), 103- 123.
63