Mobile Location-Based Games to Support Orientation & 
Mobility Training for Visually Impaired Students  
Georg Regal1, Elke Mattheiss1, David Sellitsch1, Manfred Tscheligi1,2 
1 Austrian Institute of Technology  
Center for Technology Experience  
Giefinggasse 2, Vienna, Austria  
[firstname .lastname]@ait.ac.at  2 University of Salzburg  
Center for Human -Computer Interaction  
Sigmund Haffner Gasse 18, Salzburg, Austria  
manfred.tscheligi@sbg.ac.at  
 
ABSTRACT 
Orientation and Mobility (O&M) training is an important 
aspect in the education of visually impaired students. In this 
work we present a scavenger hunt-like location-based game 
to support O&M training. In two comparative studies with 
blind and partially sighted students and interviews with 
teachers we investigate if a mobile game played in the real 
world is a suitable approach to support O&M training and if 
a mobile location-based O&M training game is preferred 
over a game played in a virtual world . Our results show that 
a mobile location-based game is a fruitful approach to 
support O&M training for visually impaired students, and 
that a mobile location based game is preferred over playing 
in a virtual world. Based on the gathered insights we discuss 
implications for using mobile location-based games in O&M 
training. 
Author Keywords 
Location-based Games; Serious Games; Visually Impaired; 
Orientation & Mobility Training 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous 
INTRODUCTION  
Wayfinding is a challenge for visually impaired (VI, 
including blind and partially sighted) people, as they cannot 
rely on visual cues such as people without visual 
impairments. This is why an essential part of the education 
of VI students consists of Orientation & Mobility (O&M) 
training, in which students learn general navigation skills and 
specific routes. Learning how to get from one place to 
another is crucial for independent wayfinding, but learning a 
certain route is usually a tedious endeavor of repeatedly 
walking the very same route and sequentially memorizing 
landmarks and orientation points (cf. [4]).   
Figure 1: Blind student playing the mobile location-based game 
in the 
school building. 
Games on the other hand tend to be fun, which is why using 
game-based approaches for O&M training is assumed to 
foster motivation and therefore learning (e.g. [22,25] ). 
Magnusson et al. [11,12] used location-based games to 
support orientation and mobility training. The games could 
be played outdoors and relied on GPS tracking technology.  
In this work we aim to support indoor O&M training in a 
school building. On the one hand we cannot rely on GPS 
tracking like [11,12] indoors but have to use other 
technologies. On the other hand indoor navigation is 
different from outdoor navigation, with less danger (e.g. by 
traffic) but most likely more complicated navigation tasks 
due to multiple floors and more complex routes. 
Although virtual [22,25] and location-based [11,12] games 
for O&M training have been proposed, a comparison of 
virtual environment vs. location-based games has not been 
done so far. Therefore, we formulate the first research 
question: 
1. Do VI students prefer a mobile location-based 
O&M training game over a virtual world game ?  
Although [11,12] delivered a promising proof of concept, 
they did not evaluate acceptance of mobile location-based 
games for O&M training, which is a crucial factor for real 
training scenarios. Thus, we formulate our second research 
question: 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
 
MobileHCI '18, September 3 –6, 2018, Barcelona, Spain  
© 2018 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights 
licensed to ACM.  
ACM ISBN 978 -1-4503 -5898 -9/18/09…$15.00  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3229434.3229472  
Accessibility and Mobile Health
MobileHCI'18, September 3-6, Barcelona, Spain
47:12. Do VI students accept a mobile location-based 
game in O&M training and what issues occur? 
Moreover, we are interested in further implications of using 
location-based games in the real world to support O&M 
training. Therefore, we formulate our third and fourth 
research questions:  
3. Do VI students prefer the mobile location-based 
app over an accompanying person when they need 
help in O&M training? 
4. What are the design implications for using mobile 
location-based games in O&M training? 
By answering these research questions, we investigate 
whether a mobile location-based game is a suitable approach 
to support O&M training. We present an implemented 
prototype for a scavenger-hunt-like mobile game. With this 
game we conduct ed two studies with VI students. In the first 
study we compare playing the mobile game in the real world 
(the school building) versus playing the same game 
mechanics in a virtual world (a virtual 3D model of the 
school building) to answer RQ1. In the second study we 
investigated specific design implications, like the 
implementation of support functionalities, for the usage of 
location-based games in O&M training and gathered in-
depth feedback from VI target users (RQ2, RQ3). Finally, we 
conducted interviews with teachers to discuss the feasibility 
of using a location-based game in education (RQ4). Based 
on the results of the studies we provide insights how to use 
mobile location-based games in O&M training. 
RELATED WORK 
In this paper we investigate the use of mobile location-based 
games for O&M training of VI people . Thus, we first present 
related work in the domain of games for O&M training 
followed by related work in the domain of location-based 
games, with special focus on learning and people with 
disabilities.   
Orientation & Mobility Training Games  
Games are an important aspect in youth culture. As most 
commercial games rely heavily on visual gameplay, 
accessible games, that allow to play a game without relying 
on vision, are required to enable VI people to participate. 
Therefore, there exists a number of games in various 
domains that are accessible for VI people in general (cf. 
[2,7,31,32] ).  
Regarding dedicated games to support O&M training , 
previous research has shown that the use of video games to 
support blind people in O&M training fosters motivation and 
commitment for learning [25]. User involvement plays an 
important role for achiev ing higher acceptance and redu ce 
the probability of the need to redesign the game [23]. Most 
research related to gameful O&M training approaches was 
done with virtual reality games. Such games support the 
construction of a mental map of an existing building or space, 
which later helps blind people to navigate in the real world. To interact with the virtual environment, the player ’s body 
movement (e.g. MOVA3D by [24]) or body movement in 
combination with a Wiimote controller were used, e.g. 
MovaWii [22]. Both methods used the clock orientation 
system [20] which means turning the players body axis 
results in direction change of the (virtual) player.  
The Audio-based Environment Simulator (AbES) is another 
approach for gameful O&M training that allows users to 
navigate through a virtual building by using a keyboard. 
Auditory cues are played while walking through the virtual 
building [15]. Blind people can thereby gather spatial 
information about a building and transfer it to the real world. 
Based on AbES, the game Audio Haptic Maze was created 
that expands the idea by adding a haptic device [21]. Each 
distinct object in the Audio Haptic Maze receives a haptic 
texture to represent the shape, thus a player can identify them 
in the virtual environment by their haptic texture. Based on 
AbES the mobile Audio-based Environment Simulator 
(mAbES) [6] for mobile phones was developed. Learning to 
navigate in a science museu m was presented as one 
successful scenario. [29] presented a game to train children 
accurate 3D sound localization, by using a mobile device and 
3D spatial audio. 
Another approach [1] relied on the usage of head tracking 
provided by the head- mounted display “Oculus Rift”. O&M 
training was performed in an audio-based computer game 
called “Legend of Iris” , which is an adventure game inspired 
by the commercial game “The Legend of Zelda”. Players 
have to complete several navigational tasks, like follow ing 
moving objects by sound or locating the origin of a sound. 
Results of a user evaluation confirmed the potential of using 
the game for O&M training, and that using the Oculus Rift 
for head tracking is a valuable approach.  
A haptic virtual environment for training VI people is 
described in [30]. The proposed system allows VI people to 
interact with virtual objects in specially designed virtual 
environments using the CyberGrasp haptic device. Of special 
interest is the cane simulation that allows training white cane 
usage in virtual environments. VI study participants could 
successfully cross a virtual traffic light crossing with the 
system. In [8,9] an interface to virtual environments for VI 
people by using Nintendo Wii technology is described . The 
system allow ed exploration of virtual worlds by VI people 
with auditory and haptic feedback. Similar to [30] the system 
also included a simulated white cane within a virtual 3D 
environment  
Although there are a number of studies investigating the 
usage of games for O&M training, most previous research is 
strongly focused on the use of virtual 3D worlds. However 
considering the rich level of sensory information (smell, -
temperature, wind, sounds, etc.) that is used by blind and 
partially sighted people for orientation and navigation we 
consider location-based games played in the real world as a 
fruitful approach, following the proof of concept for 
pervasive games for O&M training presented by [11,12] 
Accessibility and Mobile Health
MobileHCI'18, September 3-6, Barcelona, Spain
47:2Location-Based Games 
With the rise of mobile technology, location-based games 
have advanced from a niche in research (cf. [17] ) to services 
that are deeply anchored in the daily life of smartphone users. 
For example the location-based augmented reality game 
Pokémon Go (released 2016 by Niantic) was downloaded by 
several million people worldwide and there are research 
endeavors exploring acceptance factors of the game (e.g. 
[13]). Another earlier example is the game Ingress (Released 
2012 also by Niantic) which is also a mainstream location-
based augmented reality game , affect ing players everyday 
life (cf. [10]) .  
As already a broad variety of research prototypes and 
commercial location-based games exist we further focus on 
work that proposes classification for location-based games . 
Work on classification of location-based games was 
presented by [16,19] . In [16] three categories for location-
based games are described: “mobile games”,  “location aware 
games ” and “spatially aware games ”. In [19] three 
fundamental aspects to classify location- based games: “the 
size and duration of the game”, “the infrastructure available 
in the game location” and “the role that place has within the 
game play” were proposed. Regarding technical 
infrastructure an interesting approach is presented by PAC 
LAN1 [18]. In PAC-LAN players have to collect colored 
plastic RFID tags on a university campus.  
An important aspect in location-based games for VI people 
is storytelling, especially as augmented reality graphical 
overlays to the real world or 360 degree videos (e.g. [28]) are 
(due to visual impairment) not suitable for the target 
audience. Story-based games requiring players to follow a 
narrative story script in a tree like structure. The actual path 
through the tree depends on the players choices. An example 
for a storytelling game is [5] , that was played from the 
backseat of a car while driving through a city.  
Of special interest for this paper are mobile games that aim 
to foster learning and education. In a review of location-
based games for learning published by [3] there are 15 works 
mentioned that aim to follow some kind of pedagogical goal. 
Nevertheless in this review only one game [27] is dedicated 
to learning orientation (for new university students). An 
example for a location-based game for learning routes 
dedicated to people with disabilities is the application 
“RouteMate” [26]. “RouteMate” fosters learning simple 
routes by playing location-based games. The target group are 
people with cognitive disabilities (learning disabilities, 
autism and communication problems) with “ poor spatial 
skills ” The game was designed as a scavenger hunt game 
where participants had to collect hidden diamonds by 
reaching predefined stops. Evaluation results of the game  
show that game-based learning in combination with location-
                                                           
1 http://www.pac-lan.com/   based services is a successful approach that results in high 
motivation for participants and caretakers. 
Pervasive location-based games for O&M training have been 
presented by [11,12] . In [12] the NIVINAVI game is 
presented. In a user-centered design process, the authors 
developed a location-based game that relies on GPS tracking 
and can be played outdoors. In the final version of the game 
players can catch virtual animals that are placed along a 
defined path. Animals can be found by pointing a mobile 
device in different directions and can be caught by 
performing a catching gesture with the device. The final 
game was evaluated with two children. User-generated 
location-based games are presented in [11]. During a 
summer camp for children with visual impairments the 
authors used a location-based app to allow VI children to 
create and experience outdoor story-trails by placing sound 
elements along a route.  
Based on the foundation of related work we implemented a n 
indoor location-based game prototype for usage by VI people 
in O&M training.  
IMPLEMENTED GAME PROTOTYPE 
The game and the according game mechanics were designed 
in close collaboration with students and teachers. Multiple 
workshops and user tests with VI students as well as expert 
reviews with blind teachers were conducted to refine the 
prototype, but are not further discussed in this paper. The 
user-centered design process used within the project is 
described in [14] . The game was made fully accessible for 
VI (including blind) people. 
Game Mechanics and Game Context 
To complete the game the player has to walk from one 
location to another like in a scavenger-hunt. To motivate 
going from one place to another, narrative elements and 
storytelling were used, as simply going around and searching 
for the rooms would not be motivating. Thus , at each location 
the user gets information from a virtual game character (Text 
to speech Audio), in terms of a dialog with that person, a 
puzzle that needs to be solved or items that are collected. The 
sequential visit of locations is very much in line with O&M 
training, which requires memorizing route segments and 
stringing them together to learn the complete route.  
The context of the game described in this paper is a school-
building for blind and partially sighted students in Vienna 
Austria. The building consists of five floors, most 
characteristic reference points for orientation used by O&M 
trainers are the four staircases.  
For creating O&M game plots a selection of 47 rooms 
(frequently trained in O&M training) were chosen, where 
game elements could be placed. This selection covers most 
rooms that are of potential interest for the students and do not 
change each year (e.g. school kitchen, biology lab, gym, 
Accessibility and Mobile Health
MobileHCI'18, September 3-6, Barcelona, Spain
47:3etc.). Although 47 rooms can be used, concrete game plots 
use only a small subset. For example, the game plots played 
in study 1 consisted of 10 locations for each game plot and 
the game plot in study 2 consists of six locations. Only the 
hallways are used for gameplay, so users do not have to 
actually go inside the rooms, which allows for playing the 
game also if a room is occupied or locked. 
To support finding unknown rooms the player could use a 
help function if a location is unknown. The description 
consists of the floor the location is based (e.g. 2nd floor) and 
two reference points the location can be found in between 
(e.g. between “main -staircase” and “kitchen -staircase”). In 
this concrete school building for most of the locations the 
reference points are staircases, as those are the main 
reference points used in O&M training for this very school 
building. 
The game is played either in the real school building or a 
virtual model of the school (a 3D audio-enhanced model of 
the school). In study 1 gameplay in the virtual vs. real 
building was compared. In study 2 games were played only 
in the real building.  
 
 
Figure 2: Real school building. 
 
Figure
 3. Student with low vision retrieving game content 
(visually 
and read by text to speech) from an NFC tag while 
playing the location-based game in the real school building. Location-Based Real World G ame 
In the real world users play the game by walking in the real 
building which is equipped with NFC tags, allowing to store 
game content at different locations (figure 2 and figure 3).  
To play the game players need to scan the NFC tag with a 
mobile phone (figure 3) at a certain location and the game 
event is read to the user by text to speech. No additional 
indoor tracking or localization technique is used. To be 
easily found by the students, the tags are placed in a 
consistent way (e.g. on the right side of the door in a 
specific height).  
When interaction is needed (e.g. when a decision has to be 
made or in dialogs with virtual characters) users can interact 
by swiping left and right on the mobile phone. The game is 
implemented for Android mobile phone in Unity. 
Virtual World 
In the first study we compared playing in the real school 
building with a virtual model of the school. In the virtual 
school (figure 4) players play the game by moving a virtual 
(first person) character through a virtual school building by 
using the computer ’s keyboard.  
 
  
Figure 4: Virtual school building. 
 
Figure
 5: An example for game content in the virtual school 
bu
ilding, displayed visually and read to the players using text 
to speech. 
Accessibility and Mobile Health
MobileHCI'18, September 3-6, Barcelona, Spain
47:4In the virtual world there are two game modes. Discrete 
movement mode, where the player gets an auditory 
description at each crossing (especially suitable for blind 
people) and where each keypress is one step. In this mode, 
only one defined routes along the corridor can be navigated. 
The other mode (free movement mode) provides no auditory 
description and continuous movement is possible. Partially 
sighted students played free movement mode, and legally 
blind students played discrete movement mode.  
To play the game players have to find the correct door and 
press the space key. The game events are read to the users 
using text to speech in both versions. In order to provide 
additional support to partially sighted students game events 
are displayed visually as well (figure 5). The game and the 
3D model of the school was built in Unity 3D.  
Game Plots 
In this section the game plots used in study 1 and 2 are 
described. All actions in the game plots had to be performed 
in the virtual game only, no real objects had to be found, used 
or moved.  
For study 1 two game plots were designed: (1) One game plot 
was called “ the secret society ” and students had to succeed 
in a quest to enter the “secret society of orientation masters”. 
The game plot consisted of 10 locations, where students had 
to collect items (e.g. a document from the library ) bring those 
items to virtual characters (e.g. bring the document to the 
O&M teache r) and solve puzzles (e.g. use salt to make an 
invisible message visible ). (2) The second game plot was 
called “the agent school ”. This game plot also consisted of 
10 locations. Again students had to collect items (e.g. 
explosive pudding from the kitchen ) and solve puzzles (e.g. 
“What is the name of the famous MI6 agent? ” – A) James 
Bond or B) Jakob Blond ).  
For study 2 one game plot was designed. The game plot 
consisted of 6 locations , a starting location (the school’s 
entrance), four rooms at different locations in the school and 
the end location (again the entrance). The game plot was 
called “ the time traveler ”. Students had to help a cursed time 
traveler from the medieval ages to return home, by collecting 
three items needed for a time travel potion : magic salt, a 
magic wand  and a spell. The items were placed at three 
locations in the school, students could freely decide in which 
order they wanted to collect the items. After all items were 
collected, students had to decide how to use those items - A) 
“move magic wand, throw salt and read the spell out loud ” 
or B) “burn the spell, eat the salt, break the magic wand ”. If 
used correctly the time traveler could go back to his century.   
Comparison to Related Work 
In the classification by [16] our game can be classified in 
the category “The Virtual Scavenger Hunt”, as this is the 
basic game mechanic used in the mobile location-based 
game presented. The game mechanic is based on tree-like 
structure to tell the story like in [5], but in contrast we use 
walking as a desired mode of transportation. Similar to [26] our aim is to support learning routes in a real world context. 
According to [19] the usage of places in our mobile 
location- based game can be characterized as “designer 
placed”, as the placement of game elements at a defined 
location is important to support O&M training. User placed 
events at run time, or random placed elements are not 
suitable, as this would undermine the effect of sequentially 
visiting defined locations. Also according to [19] our game 
can be classified as “short, time constrained game played on 
foot in a well-defined game ar ea”. In terms of infrastructure 
and sensing technology (cf. [19]), for localization of 
specific places our mobile location-based game for O&M 
training uses as similar approach as PAC-LAN [18] .  
A similar idea of a location-based game for O&M training 
was presented by [11,12]. The main difference is that the 
presented games are played outdoors and relied on GPS 
tracking. In contrast our game is played indoors therefore 
we cannot rely on GPS tracking but use NFC tags instead. 
Also indoor navigation is different from outdoor navigation 
with potentially more complicated navigation tasks due to 
multiple floors and more complex routes.   
Although location-based approaches with similar game 
mechanics [5,12,26] and similar location tracking 
technology [18] to our game have been described to the best 
of our knowledge no work on indoor location-based games 
to support O&M training for VI people exist.  
METHOD 
We conducted two studies with VI students and interviews 
with teachers to investigate the acceptance and practical 
implementation issues of location-based games for O&M 
training.  
In the first study we compared the location-based game with 
playing in a virtual world , to assess the players’ preferences 
and reasons for their preferences. In the second study we 
investigated specific aspects of location-based games in 
O&M training by comparing getting help from an 
accompanying person or getting help by a digital help 
function . Moreover, we aimed to gather in-depth user 
feedback when playing the game in O&M training. Finally, 
we conducted interviews with O&M trainers and teachers to 
discuss the feasibility of location-based games for usage in 
school.  
Participants 
Study 1.  Altogether 12 students from a school for the blind 
in Vienna, Austria participated in two evaluation sessions (6 
in the first evaluation session and 6 in the second evaluation 
session. – see Table 1. Participants (5 female, 7 male) were 
between 15 and 23 years old (M = 17.83, SD = 2.29). For 
navigation seven students use a white cane, one a magnifying 
glass, and four use no navigation aid. As assistive devices for 
operating a PC, seven students use a Braille display and voice 
output, two magnifying software, and three use none. 
 
Accessibility and Mobile Health
MobileHCI'18, September 3-6, Barcelona, Spain
47:5ID Sex Age Visual Impairment  
S1 W 17 severe visual impairment from birth  
S2 M 20 visual impairment from birth  
S3 W 16 legally blind from birth  
S4 W 16 legally blind from birth  
S5 W 18 legally blind later in life  
S6 W 18 severe visual impairment from birth  
S7 M 23 legally blind from birth  
S8 M 19 severe visual impairment later in life  
S9 M 15 severe visual impairment from birth  
S10 M 19 visual impairment from birth  
S11 M 18 visual impairment from birth  
S12 M 15 severe visual impairment from birth  
Table 1. Participants in Study 1 
ID Sex Age Visual Impairment  
P1 W 12 legally blind from birth  
P2 M 13 legally blind from birth  
P3 W 10 severe visual impairment from birth  
P4 W 11 severe visual impairment from birth  
P5 W 12 severe visual impairment from birth  
P6 W 14 legally blind later in life  
P7 M 9 severe visual impairment from birth  
P8 M 14 visual impairment later in life  
P9 M 14 legally blind from birth  
P10 M 17 visual impairment later in life  
P11 M 19 legally blind from birth  
P12 M 17 visual impairment later in life  
P13 W 13 legally blind later in life  
P14 M 13 visual impairment later in life  
P15 W 14 legal ly blind from birth  
Table 2. Participants in Study 2 
ID Sex Age Visual Impairment  
T1 M 61 legally blind from birth  
T2 M 47 sighted without visual impairments  
T3 W 37 sighted without visual impairments  
Table 3. Participants Interview 
 
                                                           
2 https://www.limesurvey.org/   Study 2.  Fifteen students (7 female, 8 male) between 9 and 
19 years (M = 13.47, SD = 2.67) participated in the second 
study – see Table 2. As navigational aid eleven students use 
a white cane, one uses a dictation machine, and three use no 
aid. For PC operating, nine students use a Braille display, 
eight use voice output, and five use magnifying software. 
One student did not use a PC. Regarding phone usage, eleven 
of the students own a touch-based mobile phone, three a 
phone with physical keyboard, and one student owns no 
phone. On the phone seven students use voice output, two 
magnify the font and five use no assistive functionality. 
Interviews  Three teachers two male (T1, T2) and one female 
(T3) participated in the interview – see Table 3 . Participants 
had 40 (T1) , 17 (T2) and 9 (T3) years of teaching experience. 
Subjects’ thought are language, music, informatics, chess, 
and programming (T1), O&M training (T2) and O&M 
training, life skills (T3). 
Procedure 
Study 1.  We created two stories (game plots) that could be 
played in both conditions , in the virtual world and the real 
world location-based game – see section “game plots” . After 
a short introduction into the aim of the study, the students 
played the location-based game individually with a mobile 
phone in the school building and the virtual world game in a 
class room on PC. Two students started with playing the 
location-based game plots (two different stories at different 
points in the school) with the mobile phone and were 
observed while playing from one test facilitator each to note 
down issues with the game.  
The rest of the group started with playing in the virtual world 
and was observed by another test facilitator. When a student 
finished with the first condition (virtual or real), she started 
playing the other condition (as soon as a mobile phone and 
respectively a PC was available). Due to organizational 
constraints, we did not balance the order of game conditions 
(location-based vs. virtual) between students, but we believe 
that this will not strongly affect the results as the gameplay 
and interaction vary widely. However, because the content 
of the game plot could influence the students’ opinion, we 
balanced the order of the two different game plots between 
students. 
After each game condition students were interviewed 
individually to assess how much fun they had playing the 
game and how useful they think such a game is for improving 
orientation in the school building. Finally, after both game 
conditions were played, the students answered an accessible, 
digital survey (implemented with LimeSurvey2) to assess 
their preference for one game condition. Each evaluation 
session took about 2.5 hours and was conducted during 
regular classes. 
Study 2.  After an introduction in the basic concept, students 
played a game plot (see section “game plots”). As one aim of 
Accessibility and Mobile Health
MobileHCI'18, September 3-6, Barcelona, Spain
47:6the study was to investigate different possibilities to help 
students to find unknown rooms, students were instructed to 
use a digital help function of the game app or to ask the test 
facilitator for half of the rooms each. The information 
provided by the app and the test facilitator was the same 
(both provided the floor of the room and the nearby 
staircases). The order of the support condition was balanced 
between students (half of the students used the app for the 
first two rooms and ask the test facilitator for the second two 
rooms and the other half of students did it the other way 
around). To assure that every student experienced both 
support conditions, even if she did not need help, the test 
facilitator triggered the support for the second room each, if 
not used before, i.e. prompted the students to use the app 
support or provided help without being asked. After playing, 
students were asked interview questions about the game, 
especially the support conditions. 
Interviews with teachers. The focus of the interviews was 
gathering feedback for the practical usage of the location-
based game approach in O&M training and possible 
applications in other subjects. First we showed the editor for 
creating games (which is not part of this paper) and a small 
example game in the real world and also in the virtual world 
to the teachers . Subsequently we conducted a semi-
structured interview on usage of the mobile location-based 
game in O&M training as well as possible usage in other 
subjects. We also asked about perceived usefulness and 
possible reasons not to use it. 
RESULTS 
Study 1: RQ1 - Location-Based versus Virtual World 
Game 
Fun.  When asked in the digital survey, the majority of 
students (10 out of 12) indicated that the location-based 
game was more fun than playing in the virtual world, 2 out 
of 12 preferred the virtual world ( S3, S6 ). Also the results of 
the rating question in the interviews after playing the game 
versions suggest a preference for the location-based game . 
We asked the students to rate how much fun the game was 
from 1 (very) to 5 (not at all). The mean rating of fun was 
higher for the location-based game (1.33 , SD = 0.49) than for 
playing in the virtual world (1. 66, SD = 0. 88). However, 
considering the large variance in the data, the difference in 
mean ratings is not significant ( t(17,18) = -1.14 , p = .27).  
To gather more insights on reasons why the two game 
versions were fun, we asked students about what was and 
was not fun right after playing in the interviews and why one 
game version was more fun than the other in the digital 
survey. For the following results we only considered answers 
which were not related to the content of the game itself.  
We found, that the reasons why the location-based game was 
considered as fun was for most students because of going 
around and being on the move (6 students , S4, S6, S8, S9, 
S10, S11 ) and searching and finding rooms (2 students, S6, 
S7). Similarly, students enjoyed in the virtual world going around virtually (6 students, S2, S3, S6, S11, S10, S9 ) and 
searching and finding rooms (4 students , S5, S7, S11, S12 ). 
They also liked that the virtual world is a model of the real 
school (3 students, S3, S6, S9 ).  
Asked for the contrary, namely what was not fun, students 
answered for the location-based game that it was too easy (3 
students , S8, S9, S12 ) and for playing in the virtual world that 
it was hard to figure out where you are (4 students , S1, S4, 
S5, S7 ).  
Helpfulness for Improving Orientation.  Regarding how 
helpful the game was to improve orientation in the school 
building, in the digital survey 10 of 12 students stated that 
the location-based game to be more helpful than playing in 
the virtual world. The remaining t wo students ( S5, S10) 
indicating playing in the virtual world to be more helpful 
were interestingly different ones than the two who selected 
playing in the virtual game to be more fun. The mean ratings 
(1 to 5) of helpfulness for orientation from the interview 
again suggest a small but not significant ( t(20.32) = -0.39 , p 
= .70 ) preference for location-based games (2.16 , SD = 1.19 ) 
compared to playing in the virtual world (2. 33, SD = 0.88 ). 
The main reason mentioned why the location-based game is 
helpful was that you memorize the locations by actually 
going there (2 students , S1, S4 ). Directly comparing the two 
game versions students state that you get a better idea about 
the school building when you navigate through it in real (5 
students , S1, S2, S4, S8, S9 ) and when you actually move 
yourself (2 students , S7, S11).  
Study 2: RQ 2 – Acceptance of and Issues with the 
Location-Based Game 
Acceptance In the second study 13 of 15 students agreed (12 
strong agree, 1 agree – P3) that they would like to play such 
mobile location-based games in O&M training . 1 student 
(P11) disagreed and 1 student ( P4) stated to be undecided. 
When asked for the reason, 11 students ( P1, P3, P4, P5, P6, 
P7, P8, P9, P12, P13, P14 ) stated that this is fun and the 
story is engaging, 5 students ( P1, P2, P3 ,P5, P12 ) stated that 
this helps for learning orientation as you get to know the 
school building during play. Reasons why they would not use 
such a game were “that you cannot use it outdoor”  (P11) and 
that “it does not allow O&M training that includes public 
transportation, e.g. getting onto a tram ” (also P11) . One 
student stated the benefit that this game “can be played every 
day, O&M training is only once a week”  (P14). Thus, this 
game can support self-motivation and independent 
exploration of the building. 
New game modes. During the interviews after playing the 
game students were asked if they would prefer playing the 
game against others, or with others. 6 students ( P1, P6, P7, 
P8, P9, P10 ) stated they would prefer playing against others, 
4 would prefer playing with others ( P5, P11, P13, P15 ), and 
3 students ( P2, P3, P14 ) mentioned that they would prefer 
playing with others against others in teams. Only one student 
preferred playing the game alone ( P12), 1 student was 
Accessibility and Mobile Health
MobileHCI'18, September 3-6, Barcelona, Spain
47:7undecided ( P4). 4 students ( P1, P7, P8, P10 ) explicitly stated 
that competition is more fun and should therefore be 
included in the game play. 
Usability issues . During scanning of NFC tag problems 
where observed for 10 students ( P1, P4, P5, P6, P7, P8, P9, 
P10, P11, P15 ), due to the fact that the mobile phone needs 
to be placed accurately and close on the NFC tag. If player 
could not read the tag, help was provided by the facilitator. 
All users were able to scan at least one tag without help. Also 
improvement for scanning the tags were observed during the 
gameplay.  
Usability issues with the smartphone in general were 
observed for 6 students ( P1, P2, P3, P8, P12, P13 ). E.g. 
problems with double-tap, holding the phone in a wrong 
phone orientation, etc. Nevertheless all 15 students could 
successfully finish the game (some with a little help). 
Further location and usage contexts.  In the interview 
students were asked if they could think of other usage 
context. 4 students ( P1, P3, P12, P14 ) stated they would 
deploy the game also to other schools, 5 students ( P2, P5, 
P9, P12, P13 ) stated that outdoor usage would be desirable, 
3 students ( P8, P9, P14 ) want to play the game also at home. 
Moreover, also further locations like hotels, camps, shopping 
mall, public swimming pool, etc. were mentioned.  
Study 2: RQ3 – Preference for the Support Function 
Support function. As all students experienced the suppor t 
function of the game app as well as the support by the test 
facilitator providing the same information, we asked them 
which support they would prefer when playing such a game 
in O&M training. Most of the students (overall 7 students, 
P1, P3, P6, P12, P13, P14, P15 ) would prefer using the app 
support, 5 students ( P7, P8, P9, P10, P11 ) preferred asking 
the mobility trainer and 2 students (P2, P5) were indecisive , 
1 student ( P4) mentioned other people (e.g. bystanders). The 
reasons why the app support is preferred were because it 
provides support also when nobody is around (2 students,  P2, 
P15), the mobility trainer could complain when the student 
should already know where the room is (1 student , P1), or 
the person asked for help would automatically lead the way 
instead of just describing it (1 student , P3). However, 4 
students ( P2, P7, P9, P11 ) stated that the app support is 
limited and the mobility trainer is able to provide more 
detailed information, e.g. indicate turns, when the floor and 
nearby staircases is not enough. 
Interviews: RQ4 Implications for Using Mobile Location-
Based Games in O&M Training 
Interviews with teachers provided further insight on possible 
usage in O&M training and other subjects. When asked 
“What they think about using the location -based game in 
O&M training” two teachers ( T1, T2 ) answered that this 
could be useful for deepening the knowledge and for 
repetition, but the fundamentals (e.g., usage of the white 
cane, a basic mental model of the building etc.) need to be 
learned beforehand. One teacher ( T3) stated that she liked the approach as it provides “various possibilities to pack O&M 
training in a story” and thus should enhance motivation to 
find the rooms. ( T3) 
One teacher ( T2) stated that this can provide the opportunit y 
to only observe the training. Also this games could be a 
“highlight” in O&M training  (mentioned also by T2). 
Positively was also mentioned that a story allows blocking 
certain path (e.g. a certain staircase is “blocker through a 
fire”) and thus is a good method to get students away from 
their known tracks to explore also new paths (mentioned also 
by T2). The design of the story can support getting to know 
a certain area for example if only the first floor is used ( T3).  
All teachers agreed (fully agree , T2, T3  and rather agree , T1) 
that this could help students learning ways and locations in 
O&M training. All 3 teachers agreed that they want to use 
such games in their classes. As a possible drawback, teachers 
stated the “development of a story/level” (T1)  and “time 
constraints for complex stories due to one hour lessons ” (T1). 
Moreover, one teacher ( T3) stated that “it is important to 
embed the game in the overall O&M training curriculum and 
not use it detached”.  
Teachers also mentioned that the NFC tag solution is good, 
because it ensures that really the right room has been found 
(T2). This possibly would not be so accurate for other 
location-based solutions, like, GPS, Bluetooth low energy, 
or dead reckoning. The constraint “that smartphone 
knowledge is required”  (T2) was stated as a possible 
withdraw by one teacher in the interviews. 
When asked for usage in other subjects “learning storytelling 
in language classes”  (T1), “usage in informatics, especially 
for younger students” (T1) and “quiz games can be used in 
almost all subjects” (T1) were mentioned. Also teachers 
mentioned usage in other context for example in the 
schoolyard ( T1), other schools ( T3) or the surrounding 
building blocks ( T2).  
DISCUSSION  
The results of both studies and the interviews which teachers 
suggest that location-based games are a fruitful approach to 
support O&M training.  
In the following section we discuss the differences between 
O&M training in virtual worlds (as already proposed by 
related work e.g. [22,25]) and location-based games for 
O&M training in real environments (proposed by [11,12] and 
in this paper ) and draw implications for future 
implementations of mobile location-based games for O&M 
training .  
Virtual vs. Real 
We found a tendency that playing in a real world is preferred 
(although not statically significant) for location-based games 
over virtual world. A majority of students indicated that the 
location-based game was more fun and more helpful for 
learning orientation than playing in the virtual world. This 
Accessibility and Mobile Health
MobileHCI'18, September 3-6, Barcelona, Spain
47:8supports our assumption that location-based approach are 
more suitable.  
There are several advantages of a mobile location-based 
game played in the real environment. A location-based game 
supports O&M training in a holistic way (in contrast to a 
completely virtual game), as students make heavy use of 
various sensory information while navigating (e.g. tactile 
surfaces, temperature), which are difficult to simulate in a 
virtual game. Furthermore, considering the heterogeneous 
target group (with students having different levels of visual 
impairment), playing in the real world seems to be the best 
solution. As students with low vision prefer visual games and 
blind students may not accept games with visual content , 
because they give students with low vision an advantage , 
especially in competitive scenarios, a location-based game is 
the most inclusive. 
Considering implementation costs, the real world location-
based game is cheaper, and can be more easily deployed to 
further locations, as no 3D model of the building needs to be 
implemented. For establishing the location-based game in a 
new building only a list of locations, NFC cards for each 
room and a description how to get there (for the help 
function) is needed. A hindering aspect could be that the 
location-based infrastructure needs to be set up in the real 
world (applying NFC tags to the rooms) and maintenance is 
needed (e.g. if NFC tags disappear).  
This is a benefit of the GPS tracking based approach 
presented by [11,12] as no dedicated tracking infrastructure 
needs to be set up and also no maintenance is needed. Still 
GPS tracking is not very accurate (GPS position precision 
was mentioned as a technical limitation by [12]) and also 
GPS positioning is not usable indoors. Therefore, and as 
indoor localization is in general more challenging, we 
consider the presented NFC approach to be an effective 
solution for indoor O&M training games. However, as 
mentioned in [12], the advantage of practicing remotely (e.g. 
from home), is only present in virtual environments for 
O&M training (e.g. [1,8,15,22] ).  
A possible limitation is that the implementation of the 
location-based game and the virtual world could have biased 
the results. We conducted an intense user-centered design 
process when developing the game. Thus, we assume that the 
game fits the requirements for playful O&M training of 
students and teachers and is also accessible. Nevertheless, a 
virtual world would allow for more visual gameplay which 
could shift the favor (at least for partially sighted students) 
towards this mode. In the studies presented in the paper we 
intentionally applied the same mechanic (storytelling) to 
both environments.  
A benefit of the chosen story-based game mechanic is tha t 
text-based stories can be more easily implemented without 
programming knowledge and thus are more suitable for 
allowing students and teachers to create games themselves. 
Interestingly [12] intentionally did not use a storytelling approach as this was rejected by the participants in the first 
design iterations. Therefore, in the final implementation of 
the NIVINAVI game, the children collect virtual animals 
with a virtual butterfly net along a route. In contrast we found 
no indications against a storytelling approach, neither in the 
user-centered design phase c.f. [14], nor did we encounter 
any issues (e.g. that students could not follow the story) in 
the two conducted studies. A potential explanation of the 
different perceived suitability of storytelling could be the age 
of the participants as the participants in [12] were overall 
younger (M: 10.90 SD: 3.88) than the participants in this 
paper (M: 15.40 SD: 3.36) 
Usage in O&M Training 
The game presented in this paper aims to enhance O&M 
training by making the, often boring and tedious, task of 
revisiting routes and location more fun and engaging.  
A certain limitation is that this game cannot be a substitution 
for basic O&M training . The game presented in this paper is 
only suitable for students who have a rough understanding of 
the building’s layout, but need to learn details, and might not 
be usable for first time visitors. 
In the interviews all teachers suggest that the game is suitable 
for repetition, but the fundamentals need to be learned 
beforehand. Nevertheless learning principles of O&M, e.g. 
correct usage of the white cane is also not possible in most 
virtual world game approaches (e.g. [1,15,22]) except for 
fully immersive virtual environments (e.g. [8,30]) .  
To support exploring the environment and finding new 
rooms independently (e.g. without the need of help from an 
O&M trainer) we implemented the support function that 
provides a description where a room is located. The support 
function was perceived well by the participants, but it might 
be difficult to implement a verbal only description (e.g. 2nd 
floor between “main -staircase” and “kitchen -staircase”) in 
more complex buildings or environments.  
Here, precise location tracking, for example Bluetooth Low 
Energy (BT-LE) beacons (indoor) or GPS (outdoor, cf. 
[11,12]) could be used to provide additional localization 
support.  
Future Work  
In future work we propose to use BT-LE beacons , for 
providing a location tracking of the students as this provides 
better support and adds opportunities for additional game 
mechanics, as actions can also be triggered at further distance 
from the destination, e.g. in the hallway.  
Also this could overcome usability issues regarding 
problems of correct placement of the mobile phone when 
scanning a NFC tag. Nevertheless O&M trainers argued that 
the search for NFC tags could improve finding the correct 
room, as the exact door needs to be found, which is important 
if rooms are close to each other. The placement of the NFC 
tag (in our implementation always on the right side of the 
door) could help improving knowledge of left-right 
Accessibility and Mobile Health
MobileHCI'18, September 3-6, Barcelona, Spain
47:9direction, which is often an issued in O&M training 
according to one teacher (O&M trainer). Also BT-LE 
beacons are approximately 10 times more expensive and 
could thus hinder large scale implementation due to budget 
reasons. Maintenance is a further factor to consider as the 
batteries in the BT-LE beacons have to be changed after 
some time.   
For the help function we found a (not significant) preference 
for an implemented help function over asking other people 
or the O&M trainer for help. Still in the interviews O&M 
trainers stated that sometimes in O&M training interaction 
with other persons is desired. For example, it could be part 
of the O&M training to ask for direction if lost. A possibility 
could be to allow O&M trainers to disable the help function. 
In future work, usage in other contexts, e.g. outdoors, as 
mentioned by students and teachers should be done to 
investigate the scalability of the approach. Also using the 
game in other subjects than O&M training, e.g. for learning 
storytelling in language classes or for learning programming 
by actively designing a game, are interesting further use 
cases for the developed mobile location-based game. 
CONCLUSION  
We conducted two studies with VI students and interviews 
with teachers to investigate the usage of mobile location-
based games in orientation and mobility training. We 
presented results regarding preference of real world games 
over games in virtual worlds and design implications for 
mobile location-based games. 
We show ed that mobile location-based games can 
successfully be applied to O&M training and that such games 
are perceived well by students and teachers. We found a 
preference for playing in the real world against playing in a 
virtual world.  
In future work the approach should also be applied to further 
usage contexts, especially outdoors. Also switching to a 
different form of localization by using Bluetooth Low 
Energy beacons instead of NFC tags will be considered in 
future work. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We thank the students and teachers of the Austrian Institute 
for the Blind for their participation.  
This work has been partly funded by the project BlindBits – 
SPA 05/024 and the project POINTS – SPA 06/153, both 
projects conducted within the funding program "Sparkling 
Science", funded by the Austrian Federal Ministry of 
Education, Science and Research. 
REFERENCES 
1. Kevin Allain, B Dado, Mick Van Gelderen, Olivier 
Hokke, Miguel Oliveira, R Bidarra, N D Gaubitch, 
Richard C Hendriks, and Ben Kybartas. 2015. An 
audio game for training navigation skills of blind 
children. In Sonic Interactions for Virtual 
Environments (SIVE), 2015 IEEE 2nd VR Workshop on, 1–4. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/SIVE.2015.7361292 
2. Dominique Archambault, Université Pierre, Inserm 
U Inova, Saint Bernard, and Damien Olivier. 2005. 
How to Make Games for Visually Impaired 
Children. Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCHI 
International Conference on Advances in computer 
entertainment technology : 450 –453. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1178477.1178578 
3. Nikolaos Avouris. 2012. A Review of Mobile 
Location-based Games for Learning across Physical 
and Virtual Spaces. UCS  18, 15: 2120 –2142. 
4. Jan Balata, Jakub Franc, Zdenek Mikovec, and Pavel 
Slavik. 2013. Collaborative navigation of visually 
impaired. Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces  8, 
2: 175 –185. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12193- 013-
0137-9 
5. John Bichard, Liselott Brunnberg, Marco Combetto, 
Anton Gustafsson, and Oskar Juhlin. 2006. Backseat 
playgrounds: Pervasive storytelling in vast location 
based games. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics): 
117–122. https://doi.org/10.1007/11872320_14 
6. Marcia De Borba Campos, Jaime Sánchez, Anderson 
Cardoso Martins, Régis Schneider Santana, and 
Matías Espinoza. 2014. Mobile navigation through a 
science museum for users who are blind. In 
International Conference on Universal Access in 
Human-Computer Interaction , 717 –728. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3- 319-07446-7_68 
7. Flavio Coutinho, Marcelle Silva, Raquel Prates, and 
Luiz Chaimowizc. 2010. A Survey on Game 
Accessibility. Universal Access in the Information 
Society  10, 1: 81– 100. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-010-0189-5 
8. Lindsay Evett, Steven Battersby, Allan Ridley, 
David Brown, and Clifton Lane. 2009. An interface 
to virtual environments for people who are blind 
using Wii technology – mental models and 
navigation. Journal of Assistive Technologies  3, 2: 
30–39. https://doi.org/10.1108/17549450200900013 
9. Lindsay Evett, David Brown, Steven Battersby, 
Allan Ridley, and Pauline Smith. 2008. Accessible 
virtual environments for people who are blind – 
creating an intelligent virtual cane using the 
Nintendo Wii controller. In The 7th International 
Conference on Virtual Rehabilitation (ICVDRAT) , 
271–278. 
10. Pavel Karpashevich, Eva Hornecker, Nana Kesewaa 
Dankwa, Mohamed Hanafy, and Julian Fietkau. 
2016. Blurring boundaries between everyday life 
and pervasive gaming. In Proceedings of the 15th 
International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous 
Accessibility and Mobile Health
MobileHCI'18, September 3-6, Barcelona, Spain
47:10Multimedia - MUM ’16 , 217 –228. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3012709.3012716 
11. Charlotte Magnusson, Héctor Caltenco, Sara 
Finocchietti, Giulia Cappagli, Graham Wilson, and 
Monica Gori. 2015. What Do You Like? Early 
Design Explorations of Sound and Haptic 
Preferences. In Proceedings of the 17th 
International Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services 
Adjunct - MobileHCI ’15 , 766 –773. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2786567.2793699 
12. Charlotte Magnusson, Annika Waern, Kirsten 
Rassmus Gröhn, Åse Bjernryd, Helen Bernhardsson, 
Ann Jakobsson, Johan Salo, Magnus Wallon, and 
Per-Olof Hedvall. 2011. Navigating the world and 
learning to like it - mobility training through a 
pervasive game. In Proceedings of the 13th 
International Conference on Human Computer 
Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services - 
MobileHCI ’11, 285. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2037373.2037416 
13. Elke Mattheiss, Christina Hochleitner, Marc Busch, 
Rita Orji, and Manfred Tscheligi. 2017. 
Deconstructing Pokémon Go – An Empirical Study 
on Player Personality Characteristics. In Persuasive 
Technology  (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), 
83–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-55134-0 
14. Elke Mattheiss, Georg Regal, David Sellitsch, and 
Manfred Tscheligi. 2017. User-centred design with 
visually impaired pupils: A case study of a game 
editor for orientation and mobility training. 
International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction 
11: 12–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.2016.11.001 
15. Lotfi B. Merabet, Erin C. Connors, Mark A. Halko, 
and Jaime Sánchez. 2012. Teaching the Blind to Find 
Their Way by Playing Video Games. PLoS ONE  7, 
9: e44958. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0044958  
16. Daniela Nicklas, Christoph Pfisterer, and Bernhard 
Mitschang. 2001. Towards location- based games. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Applications and Development of Computer Games 
in the 21st Century : 61–67. 
17. Jonathan Raper, Georg Gartner, Hassan Karimi, and 
Chris Rizos. 2007. Applications of location –based 
services: a selected review. Journal of Location 
Based Services  1, 2: 89 –111. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17489720701862184 
18. Omer Rashid, Ian Mullins, Paul Coulton, and 
Reuben Edwards. 2006. Extending cyberspace. 
Computers in Entertainment  4, 1: 4. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1111293.1111302 
19. Josephine Reid. 2008. Design for coincidence : Incorporating real world artifacts in location based 
games. DIMEA ’08 Proceedings of the 3rd 
international conference on Digital Interactive 
Media in Entertainment and Arts : 18 –25. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1413634.1413643 
20. Jaime Sánchez and Miguel Elías. 2007. Guidelines 
for designing mobility and orientation software for 
blind children. Human-Computer Interaction –
INTERACT 2007 : 375–388. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3- 540-74796-3_35 
21. Jaime Sánchez and Matías Espinoza. 2011. Audio 
haptic videogaming for navigation skills in learners 
who are blind. In The proceedings of the 13th 
international ACM SIGACCESS conference on 
Computers and accessibility - ASSETS ’11 , 227. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2049536.2049580 
22. Jaime Sánchez, Matias Espinoza, and Jose Miguel 
Garrido. 2012. Videogaming for wayfinding skills in 
children who are blind. Proc. 9th Intl Conf. on 
Disability, Virtual Reality & Associated 
Technologies : 131 –140. Retrieved January 10, 2014 
from 
http://www.icdvrat.org/2012/papers/ICDVRAT201
2_S04N4_Sanchez_Espinoza_Garrido.pdf 
23. Jaime Sánchez, Luis Guerrero, Mauricio Sáenz, and 
Héctor Flores. 2010. A Model to Develop 
Videogames for Orientation and Mobility. In 
Computers Helping People with Special Needs: 12th 
International Conference, ICCHP 2010, Vienna, 
Austria, July14-16, 2010, Proceedings, Part II , 296 –
303. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-14100-3_44 
24. Jaime Sánchez and J P Rodríguez. 2010. Videogame 
for improving orientation and mobility in blind 
children. In Proc. 8th Intl Conf. Disability, Virtual 
Reality & Associated Technologies . 
25. Jaime Sánchez, Mauricio Saenz, and Jose Miguel 
Garrido. 2010. Usability of a Multimodal Video 
Game to Improve Navigation Skills for Blind 
Children. ACM Transactions on Accessible 
Computing  3, 2: 1– 29. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1857920.1857924 
26. Maria Saridaki, Constantinos Mourlas, and Elina 
Roinioti. 2013. Engaging students with intellectua l 
disabilities through location based games. Workshop 
on Games for Learning . Retrieved from 
http://www.fdg2013.org/program/workshops/papers
/G4L2013/g4l2013_08.pdf 
27. Gerhard Schwabe and Christoph Göth. 2005. Mobile 
learning with a mobile game: design and 
motivational effects. Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning  21, 3: 204 –216. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2729.2005.00128.x 
28. Rodolfo Silva. 2013. Location-Based Digital Games 
Platform for Touristic Activities. Universidade do 
Accessibility and Mobile Health
MobileHCI'18, September 3-6, Barcelona, Spain
47:11Porto. Retrieved from https://repositorio-
aberto.up.pt/bitstream/10216/66932/2/27438.pdf 
29. Diogo Simões and Sofia Cavaco. 2014. An 
orientation game with 3D spatialized audio for 
visually impaired children. In Proceedings of the 
11th Conference on Advances in Computer 
Entertainment Technology - ACE ’14 , 1–4. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2663806.2663868 
30. Dimitrios Tzovaras, Georgios Nikolakis, Georgios 
Fergadis, Stratos Malasiotis, and Modestos 
Stavrakis. 2002. Design and implementation of 
virtual environments training of the visually impaire. 
In Proceedings of the fifth international ACM 
conference on Assistive technologies - Assets ’02, 41. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/638257.638259 
31. Thomas Westin, Kevin Bierre, Dimitris Gramenos, 
and Michelle Hinn. 2011. Advances in game 
accessibility from 2005 to 2010. In International 
Conference on Universal Access in Human-
Computer Interaction , 400 –409. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3- 642-21663-3_43 
32. Bei Yuan, Eelke Folmer, and Frederick C. Harris. 
2010. Game accessibility: a survey. Universal 
Acce ss in the Information Society  10, 1: 81 –100. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-010-0189-5 
 
Accessibility and Mobile Health
MobileHCI'18, September 3-6, Barcelona, Spain
47:12