Your Sexuality Does Not Matter!
scholar Maria Puig de la Bellacasa 
argues for treating matters of fact as 
“matters of care” while studying 
science and technology, wherein caring 
“is connected with awareness of 
oppression, and with commitments to 
neglected experiences that create 
oppositional standpoints” [4]. Paying 
attention to how queer ways of being 
inform research on computing 
technology carries a “speculative 
commitment to think about how things 
would be different if they generated 
care” [4]. Formulating scientific rigor 
in terms of commitment to exploring 
neglected experiences and generating 
care necessitates critical engagement 
with the politics of knowledge 
production.
Queer people’s contributions to 
computing research can be traced only 
if queer computing professionals are 
able to come out about their sexuality 
while risking physical harm to their 
bodies, unfair discrimination at the 
workplace, emotional turmoil in 
personal relationships, and societal 
prejudices that alienate queer people. 
Queer computing professionals must 
often make complex decisions about 
when, how, and to whom to disclose 
certain aspects of their queer identities 
in the context of their professional 
lives, a process commonly known in 
Western countries as coming out. This 
ritual of coming out is never completed 
and always evolving for queer people, 
who live in a heteronormative world 
that is laden with the assumption that 
cis-heterosexuality is the only valid, 
normal, and natural expression of 
human sexualities. Even in countries 
with legal protections for queer people, 
coming out almost always has personal 
costs associated with it in terms of 
dealing with everyday heteronormative 
prejudices. There is emotional labor Beginning with this 
column, as part of a 
three-part series, I will 
explore the 
entanglements between 
queer desire and the 
design of computer-
related technologies. I will use the word 
queer  in an intentionally ambiguous, 
playfully suggestive, and endlessly 
contestable manner. When referring to 
people’s identities, I use queer  as an 
umbrella term for those with 
historically marginalized gender, sex, 
sexuality, and reproductive identities, 
including but not limited to gay, 
lesbian, bisexual, transgender, intersex, 
asexual, gender variant, gender 
nonconforming, gender fluid, post-
gender, child-free, kinky, and 
polyamorous. Queer  as an umbrella 
term is often contentious and multiply 
transitive, defying fixed universal 
definitions. Queer theorist Eve 
Kosofsky Sedgwick formulates queer as 
“the open mesh of possibilities, gaps, 
overlaps, dissonances and resonances, 
lapses and excesses of meaning when 
the constituent elements of anyone’s 
gender, of anyone’s sexuality aren’t 
made (or can’t be made) to signify 
monolithically” [1]. In this context, 
“queer scientists are those who, living 
in conscious recognition of their sexual 
orientation, are influenced by this 
orientation in many facets of their lives, 
including the creative source and social 
matrix of their scientific careers” [2]. 
My goal in this series of columns is to 
explore the politics of knowledge 
production around how queer ways of 
being can inform the design of future 
technology and computing research.
Alan Turing, Sophie Wilson, 
Christopher Strachey, Lynn Conway, 
Mary Ann Horton, Audrey Tang, and 
Jon Hall are a few examples of queer people who have made pioneering 
contributions that have both benefited 
society at large and the field of 
computing. There are also several 
unrecognized queer people from 
different cultures who have made and 
continue to make important 
contributions through their research, 
practice, and service in computer-
related fields. Sexuality is often 
assumed to be irrelevant to computing, 
relegated as a niche topic, and when 
acknowledged, included as an 
afterthought to the development of 
technology. Specifically, queer 
sexuality is seldom credited as a 
generative force within computing 
research and practice. Conceptualizing 
computing solely as a rational, logical, 
and technical knowledge project fails 
to acknowledge the social, material, 
and interpersonal relations involved in 
the production of such knowledge. 
Narratives of computing that are built 
on a staged divorce of abstract logic 
from embodied desire are problematic 
and entangled with queer people’s 
struggle for their identities, well-being, 
and lives. For instance, Jacob Gaboury 
traces a queer history of computing 
through the lives of five gay men, 
arguing that “queerness is itself 
inherent within computational logic, 
and that this queerness becomes visible 
when we investigate those cleavages 
that partition the lives of these men 
into distinct technical and sexual 
spheres of existence” [3]. Feminist 
Queer sexuality is 
seldom credited as a 
generative force  
within computing 
research and practice.
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
JANUARY–FEBRUARY 2021   INTERACTIONS   21
COLUMN  IN-BETWEEN
Gopinaath Kannabiran,
IT University  
of Copenhageninvolved in having to explain, justify, 
and defend oneself repeatedly despite 
past painful experiences associated 
with coming out. It is not always 
possible or desirable to explicitly build 
one’s professional identity with respect 
to sexual and gender identity. People 
may choose not to disclose their sexual 
identity for a variety of reasons, 
including fear of harm to their physical 
body, their family’s well-being, and 
their livelihoods. Contrary to 
assumptions about developed nations 
being more tolerant of queer people, 
“issues of homophobia and transphobia 
are not defined by levels of 
development within nations” [5]. Apart 
from these issues, there is a two-tiered 
silencing of queer desire that hinders a 
faithful representation of queer 
people’s knowledge contributions and 
how queer ways of being can inform the 
future design of technology.
Heterosexuality as default. 
Contributions of those who choose not 
to disclose their queer identities are 
often assumed as achievements of 
heterosexual individuals because of 
existing heteronormative assumptions. 
In scenarios where coming out may be 
risky for an individual due to 
queerphobic prejudices, silencing queer 
experiences further perpetuates 
heteronormativity. Queer people have 
to explicitly and repeatedly declare 
their identity in order for a queer 
history of computing to exist amid 
heteronormative narratives of 
technological progress. Fear of 
queerphobic repercussions reify and 
normalize heterosexuality as the only 
valid, valuable, and visible sexuality in 
professional contexts. Unfortunately, 
overcoming societal and systemic 
prejudices against queer people is 
framed in terms of an individual’s 
responsibility of coming out, thus 
condemning those who cannot disclose 
their sexuality as closeted and leading 
inauthentic lives. As they say, damned 
if you do, damned if you don’t!
Your sexuality does not matter. 
When queer people explicitly claim 
their sexuality, their intellectual 
contributions are often positioned as 
separate from their sexual identity—
accepted despite  their queerness, but 
their queerness is rarely attributed as a generative force. In other words, 
acceptance of queer people in STEM-
related fields is premised on the faulty 
assumption that embodied sexual 
desire should not matter for rationally 
objective science. A bogus framing of 
equality for all through erasure of 
differences is deceptively alluring and 
conveniently adopted because it does 
not require the questioning of 
heteronormative assumptions. In such 
instances, inclusivity is reframed in 
terms of the magnanimity of 
heterosexual individuals who may 
choose to look past the queerness of 
their colleagues, thus bypassing the 
uncomfortable task of having to 
repeatedly examine their own 
prejudices and take affirmative action 
toward policy-level changes for 
addressing systemic inequities against 
queer people.
As a person of color, when someone 
tells me that they do not see color 
(however well intentioned they may 
be), I gently remind them that they can 
afford to not see color. The cost of 
“your sexuality does not matter” is not 
the same for heterosexual and queer 
individuals working in a 
heteronormative professional context. 
A feigned scientific objectivity that 
refuses to acknowledge the real-life 
struggles of individuals is both 
ethically inhumane and politically 
negligent, since it circumvents the 
social responsibility of fighting 
injustice in favor of maintaining 
neutral appearances. As if abstract 
computing logic floats as disembodied 
ahistorical universal truths untethered 
from messy power cables and devoid of 
human power struggles!
Tracing the contributions of queer 
people living in a heteronormative 
world that punishes disclosure of queer 
desire poses a difficult methodological 
dilemma: How does one uncover what 
has been historically rendered invisible 
and muted out of context as irrelevant 
under the guise of neutrality? Trying to 
establish universal causal relations and 
declare fixed meanings are 
fundamentally antithetical to 
queerness as intentionally ambiguous, 
playfully suggestive, and endlessly 
contestable. Then why bother 
examining the entanglements of queer desire and computing? Paul Giladi 
argues that “the failure to properly 
recognize and afford somebody or a 
social group the epistemic respect they 
merit is an act of injustice in the sense 
of depriving individuals of a progressive  
social environment in which the 
epistemic respect afforded to them 
plays a significant role in enabling and 
fostering their self-confidence as 
rational enquirers” [6]. By 
acknowledging the contributions of 
queer people, we can begin to seek 
some form of restorative justice for the 
violence and injustice committed 
against queer people all over the world. 
Having visible queer role models can 
help other queer computing 
professionals to gain a sense of 
belonging and confidence in their own 
abilities, pave the way for structural 
changes through collective action, and 
serve as inspiration to uplift other 
marginalized people in computing-
related professions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Tuck Leong, Jean 
Hardy, Os Keyes, Katta Spiel, and Alex 
Taylor for their timely and valuable 
feedback.
Endnotes
1. Sedgwick, E.K. Tendencies.  Duke Univ. 
Press, 1993.
2. National Organization of Gay and Lesbian 
Scientists and Technical Professionals Inc. 
(NOGLSTP) resource. Queer scientists of 
historical note; https:/ /www.noglstp.org/
publications-documents/queer-scientists-
of-historical-note/
3. Gaboury, J. A queer history of computing. 
Rhizome.  Feb. 13, 2013; https:/ /rhizome.
org/editorial/2013/feb/19/queer-
computing-1/
4. de la Bellacasa, M.P. Matters of care in 
technoscience: Assembling neglected 
things. Social Studies of Science 41 , 1 
(2011), 85–106.
5. Out Now Global. International LGBT2020 
Homophobia Report, 2020; https:/ /www.
outnowconsulting.com/media/1332/
idaho-discrimination-report-global-v7.pdf
6. Giladi P. Epistemic injustice: A role for 
recognition? Philosophy & Social Criticism 
44, 2 (2018), 141–158.
 Gopinaath Kannabiran  is a design educator, 
HCI researcher, and sexual rights activist 
currently working as a postdoc at IT University 
of Copenhagen.
 →goka@itu.dk
DOI: 10.1145/3441489  COPYRIGHT HELD BY AUTHOR
@INTERACTIONSMAG
22   INTERACTIONS   JANUARY–FEBRUARY 2021COLUMN  IN-BETWEEN