A Trust Framework Model for Situational Contexts 
Carsten D. Schultz 
University of Hagen 
1st line of address 
2nd line of address 
+49 2331 987-2671 
carsten.schultz@fernuni-hagen.de 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
Trust is a widely studied and acknowledged concept including a 
diversity of operationalizations. A trust framework model for 
situational contexts is presented to communicate a clearer and 
better understanding of the trust situation studied. The framework 
model includes the situational trust model, the trust transaction, 
and the trust equation. The situational trust model relates the 
trustor, the trustee, the trust object, and the trust environment. The 
application of the trust model is exemplified to define the trust 
situation of consumer trust in e-commerce. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors  
K.4.4 [ Computer and Society ]: Electronic Commerce – security, 
trust. 
General Terms  
Documentation, Standardization, Theory. 
Keywords  
Trust, Trustworthiness, Trust Framework Model. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Like love and freedom, trust is one of those essential human 
values that everyone understands until the question is raised what 
it is or one is asked to practice it intentionally [43]. The question 
is how do we understand trust and how can we build trust. The 
concept of trust has been widely studied by researchers in various 
disciplines [5], [30], [39], [41] such as philosophy (e. g. [8], [17], 
[40]), psychology (e. g. [21], [37], [38]), sociology (e. g. [24], 
[25]), economics (e. g. [7], [27], [46]), and computer science (e.g. 
[15], [34]). This has led to an extensive variety of different trust 
definitions [5], [10]. These diverse definitions often reflect the 
paradigms of the particular academic field of the scholars [13], 
[30]. However, even within a given field, there is a lack of 
agreement on a universal definition [21]. Although no general 
accepted agreement on the definition, characteristics, antecedences, and outcomes of trust exists, the importance of trust 
is widely recognized by researchers in the various disciplines [3], 
[20], [45]. 
A trust framework model is presented to facilitate a clearer 
and better understanding of the trust situation studied by 
researchers. The framework model supports scholars in clearly 
specifying the trust situation as well as ena¬bling an improved 
comparison, transfer, and utilization of research results. 
The theoretical background for the trust framework model is 
presented in section 2. The section introduces and distinguishes 
the concepts trust and trustworthiness. Section 2. concludes with a 
trust typology relating different trust types. In part 3., the trust 
framework model for situational contexts is addressed. At first, 
the derivation of the model is outlined before the different 
elements of the framework model are subsequently presented. 
Section 4 then applies the trust framework model to consumer 
trust in e-commerce. The paper ends with some concluding 
remarks in section 5. 
2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
2.1 Trust 
Trust has been widely studied by researchers in numerous 
disciplines, viewing trust from unique disciplinary perspectives 
and creating various definitions of trust [21]. Researchers 
operationalize trust differently, depending on the focus and phase 
of trust studied [2], [30], [39]. Despite the divergence of trust 
operationalizations across and within the various disciplines, 
“scholars do appear to agree fundamentally on the meaning of 
trust [39].” Based on a cross disciplinary meta-analysis, Rousseau 
et al. [39] defined trust as follows. 
“Trust is a psychological state comprising the intention to 
accept vulnerability based upon positive expectations of the 
intentions or behavior of another.[39]” 
This definition emphasizes that trust is not a behavior or a 
choice, but an underlying psychological condition that can cause 
or result from such actions. Rousseau et al. [39] also found that 
there exists an agreement about the fundamental conditions for 
trust to arise. The two prerequisites for trust are a confident 
expectation about an interdependent beneficial outcome while 
relying on a trustee in a risky and uncertain situation. The first 
assumption of a confident expectation concerning the possibility 
of a mutually beneficial outcome refers to a trustor’s general 
belief and the second assumption of risk and uncertainty relates to 
the underlying situation.  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
PST 2006, Oct 30-Nov 1, 2006, Markham, Ontario, Canada . 
(c) 2006 ACM 1-59593-604-1/06/00010...$5.00. 
 
12.2 Trustworthiness 
An essential part in the trust building process is the 
consumer’s interpretation of the trustworthiness communicated 
and signaled by the trustee. The perceived trustworthiness is a 
significant antecedent of trust [20]. The important distinction to 
make is that trust does not equal trustworthiness. Considering the 
possibility of a trustor deciding to trust an untrustworthy trustee, 
the existing gap between the two concepts becomes apparent. 
However, trust and trustworthiness are strongly related [43]. 
Trust, understood as the willingness of a trustor to be vulnerable 
upon the behavior of a trustee, is formed and influenced by 
characteristics of the trustor and of the trustee [27], [43]. Thereby, 
a trustor’s experience and background represent important aspects 
in building trust. These aspects have both an effect on the general 
willingness to engage in any transaction with a known or 
unknown trustee, and on the perception of any trustee’s 
trustworthiness. In any given trust situation, a trustor perceives a 
certain level of a trustee’s trustworthiness. The recognition may 
occur consciously or subconsciously. Although a trustor is 
generally free in his or her choice to trust a trustee who might be 
trustworthy or untrustworthy, the choice is usually determined 
intuitively by taking the perceived trustee’s trustworthiness into 
consideration. “Trustworthiness means, after all, being worthy of 
being trusted.[43]” 
As examined above trustworthiness is not trust. Whereas 
trust emanates from the trustor, trustworthiness is a characteristic 
of the trustee. In the literature, several researchers have identified 
the following reoccurring characteristics of the trustee: ability, 
benevolence, and integrity (e. g. [3], [11], [20], [26], [27]). As a 
set, the three constructs explain a major portion of trustworthiness 
[27]. The three distinct factors vary independently, but are 
interrelated and contribute jointly to the trustworthiness of the 
trustee [20]. In general, the various factors indicating the 
trustworthiness of the trustee can be observed and analyzed. 
Although it can be reasoned about the trustworthiness of the 
trustee, trust is not determined by questions of reason and 
evidence from a comparably objective perspective. Trust is 
established by the subjective assessment of the trustor’s 
perception of the trustee, the trust object, and the trust 
environment. 
2.3 Typology of Trust 
To facilitate the distinction of different trust concepts and 
thus enable researchers to sort out findings across the range of 
trust studies, McKnight and Chervany [28]-[31] have proposed an 
interdisciplinary conceptual typology of trust. The typology 
presented includes the four trust constructs disposition to trust, 
institution based trust, trusting beliefs, and trusting intentions. All 
four constructs imply the two fundamental assumptions of a 
confident expectation encompassing the possibility of a mutually 
beneficial outcome and the involvement in a risky and uncertain 
situation [1], [30]. The first assumption refers to the trustor’s 
general belief in the positive outcome of the decision to trust. The 
positive outcome is evaluated according to the trustor’s 
expectation. As soon as a person engages in a trust situation, s/he 
has a general expectation according to the specific situation. The 
expectation determines if the following behavior is one originated 
from trust or distrust. The second assumption relates to the 
condition of the un¬derlying situation in which a trustor may 
decide to trust a trustee to perform a certain deed. The need for trust only arises in an uncertain and risky environment [4], [6], 
[44]. If actions could be undertaken with complete certainty and 
no risk, trust would not be necessary and the trustor would not be 
in a vulnerable position [3], [12]. In the following passage, the 
four trust constructs introduced by McKnight and Chervany are 
outlined. While presenting the different constructs, the 
fundamental assumptions underlying all four constructs should be 
kept in mind – that is having confident expectations in a risky and 
uncertain situation. 
 
Figure 1. An interdisciplinary model of trust concepts 
The first construct disposition to trust (also called propensity 
to trust, e. g. [5], [9], [20]) stems from personality psychology. 
Personality psychologists have conceptualized trust as a belief, 
expectancy, or feeling deeply rooted in the personality and 
originating in the individual’s psychological development [13], 
[45]. Disposition to trust is trust viewed as an individual 
characteristic, considering a trustor’s general willingness to trust 
others. The individual’s tendency to be willing to depend on 
others is an expectancy formed by generalization of the 
individual’s experience with other people [38]. Disposition to 
trust, as a generalized tendency across situations and persons, 
influences our interpretation and perception of the situa¬tions and 
the involved persons [30]. In short, consumers have to rely on 
their general disposition to trust in an unfamiliar situation. 
In a more familiar situation, the effect of the general 
disposition to trust on the trustor decreases and the situation 
specific construct institution based trust (also called system trust, 
e. g. [24], [25], [35]) becomes more relevant. Institution based 
trust is derived from sociology. Sociologists have focused on trust 
as an institutional phenomenon, concentrating on how 
institutions, e. g. structures, roles, and regulations, provide 
assurances in situations of risk and uncertainty, and on the trust 
individuals put in those institutions [21], [22]. By institution 
based trust, McKnight and Chervany [30] refer to the trustor’s 
belief “that favorable conditions are in place that are conducive to 
situational success in an endeavor or aspect” of the trustor’s life. 
As a trustor becomes more familiar with a specific situation, the 
importance of institution based trust increases.  
In contrast to situation specific institution based trust, 
trusting beliefs and trusting intentions are defined as person 
specific [30]. The trust constructs trusting beliefs and trusting 
intentions originate from social psychology. Social psychologists 
have focused on interpersonal transactions between individuals 
including the expectations and willingness of a trustor in a 
2specific situation, the risks associated with assuming and acting 
on such expectations, and the contextual factors that enhance or 
inhibit the development and maintenance of trust [21]. McKnight 
and Chervany [30] specify trusting beliefs as cognitive, affective 
beliefs about the beneficial characteristics of the trustee. The 
trustor’s beliefs are thereby influenced by the perception of the 
different trustee’s characteristics. By investigating the 
characteristics of the trustee, researchers deal with the question 
why a trustor considers a trustee to be trustworthy [27]. The 
fourth construct trusting intentions is the willingness of a trustor 
to depend on the trustee without being able to control or influence 
the trustee [30]. Due to the focus on interpersonal transactions, 
trusting beliefs and trusting intentions can also be summarized as 
interpersonal trust [30]. The actual engagement of a trustor in a 
specific transaction has been termed trusting behavior. Trusting 
behavior is considered to be a consequence of a trust decision 
demonstrating the willingness to rely upon the trustee [27], [30]. 
3. TRUST FRAMEWORK MODEL 
3.1 Derivation of the Trust Framework Model 
 
 
Figure 2. Communication model 
 
Figure 3. Trust framework model 
Trust defined as “a psychological state comprising the 
intention to accept vulnerability based upon positive expectations 
of the intentions or behavior of another [39]” is a basic constituent of social life [25], [43]. In essence, social life equates 
to the interaction with our fellow citizens. Interacting with other 
people requires communication – either verbal or non-verbal; as 
well as communicating with other people necessarily involves 
interaction [14], [32]. In case of trust, the trustor decides willingly 
to accept vulnerability by relying on the actions of a trustee [27]. 
The decision to trust depends primarily on previous experiences 
formed by interaction and communication. The importance and 
similarity of communication and trust situation motivated the 
development of the trust framework model inspired by a 
communication model. The two models are illustrated by figures 2 
and 3. 
In the following the communication model will be briefly 
considered giving a meaning to the concepts data, information, 
and knowledge by inspecting the communication process 
introduced by the model. The communication process serves the 
comprehension of the trust process as well as heightens the 
awareness of the importance of perception and experience 
responsible for the formation of a trustor’s expectations. Then, the 
trust framework model will be presented (3.2.) including the trust 
formation process (3.3.) and the introduction of a dynamic 
dimension into the framework in form of the trust equation (3.4.). 
For the purpose of a trust framework model, the 
communication model by Shannon and Weaver [42] was adopted 
incorporating the sending and receiving process of an individual 
according to the three tier approach of data, information, and 
knowledge. The Shannon and Weaver [42] model is one way 
directed and stems from the domain of information theory. A one 
way communication model was chosen for the task to best fit the 
trust situation of a trustor placing trust in the trustee. Following 
the adopted communication model, communication consists of 
four major components the sender, the receiver, the message, and 
the environment. The communication process can generally be 
distinguished in the three phases sending, transmitting, and 
receiving. The phases of sending and receiving are concerned with 
the process of the message formation and comprehension by the 
sender and the receiver respectively. The knowledge pyramid 
displayed in figure 4 illustrates the top down formation and 
bottom up comprehension process relating the three concepts 
data, information, and knowledge. 
 
Figure 4. Knowledge pyramid 
The intention of communication is to convey information 
from a person in the role of a sender to a person in the role of a 
receiver according to a specific situation [14], [32], [42]. The 
information to be conveyed from sender to receiver is derived 
from the deduction of the sender’s situational preknowledge. By a 
3transformation process1, the information is then converted into the 
intended message. The message is represented by data and bears 
no meaning itself. Afterwards, the message is sent to the receiver 
via the chosen communication channel. Relying on his or her 
situational preknowledge, the receiver interprets the received 
message data to understand the intended message. The intended 
information and the interpreted information can vary from each 
other thereby explaining misunderstanding. Misunderstanding 
results either from the interpretation of distorted messages caused 
by noise, originating from the environment or emanates from the 
divergence of sender’s and receiver’s situational preknowledge. 
Accordingly, the resulting information depends on the inference 
of data and knowledge. In summary, the understanding of a 
receiver gained over the course of communication relies upon the 
interpretation of the intended message data according to the 
situational preknowledge of the receiver. 
3.2 Situational Trust Model 
A sender cannot be sure to be understood by the receiver and 
neither can the receiver be positive to understand the intention of 
the sender. In a similar way, a trustor cannot be certain if the trust 
placed in a transaction is respected by the trustee. The trustee in 
return is unsure about the intentions and expectations of a trustor. 
The similarity of the communication and trust situation and 
structure lead to the proposal of the situational trust framework 
model presented in figure 3. The trust framework model features 
the components trustor, trustee, trust object, and trust 
environment. In general, trust has been defined as person specific 
emanating from the trustor. However, the general possibility of a 
trustee being a non human system, for example an organization, is 
thereby not excluded.2 The trust object refers to the entity that the 
trust of the trustor revolves around. The intentions assigned to the 
trust object are the positive expectations of the trustor to be 
fulfilled by the trustee. Following the structural and situational 
analogy of trust and communication, it can however be observed 
that trust as information is neither transmitted nor directly 
observed. A trustee can only perceive the actions taken by the 
trustor to interact with the trustee as an indication for the trustor’s 
willingness to trust. As a result, the actions of the trustor and the 
trustee respectively represent the ground level, the level of 
interaction of the trust framework model. The central level and 
focus of the model is trust. The level expresses the desirable way 
of communicating trust concerning the trust object in contrast to 
the actual detour of the intention and interpretation process to 
convey trust from trustor to trustee. The upper level, the level of 
influence in the trust framework model is experience affecting the 
trust formation of a trustor and trust perception of a trustee in a 
specific situation. The situational experience covers several 
aspects of all involved components in the trust situation. A trust 
decision is based upon the trustor’s perception of and experience 
with the trustee, the trust object, and the environment. The 
arrangement of the corresponding elements involved in a trust 
situation is illustrated in figure 2 and 3. Briefly, a trust situation 
can be described as follows. A trustor willing to interact with a 
                                                                 
1 Shannon and Weaver [42] refer to the transformation process as 
coding or code. 
2 For a discussion of the topic see e. g. [24], [25], [27], [30], [35], 
and [46]. trustee formulates a trusting intention to engage in a transaction 
with the trustee [30]. The formed intentions and expectations 
covering the trustee, the trust object, and the trust environment 
result into the actions, the trusting behavior taken by the trustor 
[30]. 
The trust framework model illustrated in figure 3 is able to 
express every trust situation through the specification of the 
different components involved in the specific situation at hand. 
Basically, every situation of trust can be stated in the following 
way: 
Specific trust is trust placed by a trustor in a trustee concerning a 
trust object in a trust environment. 
The incorporation of the trust object and the trust environment 
extends the grammar of trust formulated by McKnight and 
Chervany [30] which is articulated in the following basic sentence 
structure: 
The trustor trusts the trustee. 
The grammar of trust was introduced to represent the different 
trust constructs presented in part 2.3. Agreeing with McKnight 
and Chervany about the influence of the different types of trust 
concepts for every trust situation, the four trust constructs have 
been incorporated into the trust equation as shown in section 3.4. 
3.3 Trust Transaction 
The trust situation described in the previous chapter is 
stimulated by a preceding phase of interaction between the trustor 
and the trustee. Additionally, the trust situation concludes into a 
subsequent phase of action completing the trust transaction. 
Figure 5 shows an ideal sequential flow of a trust transaction 
implicitly including the preceding phase and the subsequent 
phase. 
 
Figure 5. Trust transaction 
In a given trust situation, the trustor bases the trust decision 
on previous interactions that lead to the formation of the 
expectations related to the situation at hand. In case of no prior 
situation specific interaction and communication between the 
trustor and the trustee, the trustor relies upon former experiences 
or more generally on the disposition to trust [13], [30]. Prior 
situational interaction with the trustor however allows the trustee 
to communicate trustworthiness and clearly express the services 
4offered. So, the trustee can support the reasonable formation of a 
trustor’s expectations as well as the decision to trust. Then, the 
trust situation follows concluding in a decision to trust or 
distrust3. The subsequent phase is concerned with the behavior of 
the trustee after encountering the action of the trustor. In response 
to a trusting behavior of a trustor, the trustee either tries to fulfill 
the expectations asked for by the trustor or behaves 
opportunistically thereby answering the question if the trust 
placed in the trustee was justified. 
3.4 Trust Equation 
The trust equation complements the trust situation by 
introducing the dynamic aspect of trust and trust formation to the 
framework model. Explicitly, the trust equation supplements the 
single transactional display of any trust situation in figure 3 with 
the reference of trust formation to prior trust situations. As 
discussed previously, trust is situation specific and depends on the 
experience gained over time. Hence, trust can be expressed in its 
most elemental form as follows. 
( )t x s v V v Vt t , , ) (1 = =+  (1) 
The trust V of a trustor is formed by the trust decision 
process v according to the given situation s and the experience x 
obtained over the time t. In the next step, the components of the 
trust framework model were incorporated into the trust equation 
transforming the expression into the following. 
( )( )t , x , s t , x , s t , x , s 1 t E , O , T v t , x , s v V = =+  (2) 
In short, the trust V of a trustor is determined by the trust 
function v operating on the trustee T, the trust object O, and the 
trust environment E in accordance to the situation s and the 
previous experience x up to the point in time t. The integration of 
the various components into the trust equation represents the 
behavior of a trustor to evaluate all necessary parts of any given 
trust situation. Recalling the trust typology presented in part 2., 
the trust function v can be broken down into dispositional trust d, 
institutional trust i, and interpersonal trust p. Formula (3) 
illustrates the association between the general trust function and 
the different type of trust formation. Also pointed out in the 
formula is the fact that dispositional trust is cross situational [30] 
and that institutional [30] as well as interpersonal trust are 
situation specific [21]-[23]. 
( )()( )( )t x, s, p t x, s, i t x, d t x, s, v + + =  (3) 
B
y substituting (3) into (4), the complete trust equation can 
be written as: 
( )( )( )t x s t x s t x s t x s t x s t x s t x t x t x t T O E p T O E i T O E d V, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 1 , , , , , , + + =+ (4) 
The complete trust equation incorporates the typological 
trust functions operating on the components of the trust 
framework model according to the assessment of the consumer. 
As stated in (4), the complete trust equation represents the gradual 
development of trust over the course of previous transactions. 
Since the range of the functions d, i, and p is not limited to 
                                                                 
3 For an account on trust and distrust, see e. g. [23], [29], and 
[38]. positive values, the trust equation can account for an increasing, a 
decreasing or a constant level of trust development from t to t+1. 
The previous experiences made over time in a specific trust 
situation related to the trustee, the trust object, and the trust 
environment influence as indicated the formation of a trustor’s 
dispositional trust, institutional trust, and interpersonal trust. The 
trust equation thereby extends the trust framework model by 
adding the dynamic aspect of trust development to the trust 
framework. 
4. APPLYING THE TRUST FRAMEWORK 
MODEL 
In the context of electronic commerce (e-commerce), trust has 
emerged as one essential concept for the e-commerce acceptance 
and success [3], [20], [45]. Although a diverse variety of 
definitions to create an understanding for trust in e-commerce 
exists [5], [10], the importance of trust is widely recognized by 
researchers. Considering the business-to-consumer relationship in 
e-commerce, the fundamental lack of trust has been referred to as 
an important reason for the hesitant growth of e-commerce and 
why consumers are reluctant to shop online [12]. As Hoffman et 
al. [16] state one of the main reasons many consumers have not 
shopped online is that “consumers simply do not trust most Web 
providers [e-commerce vendors] enough to engage in 
‘relationship exchanges’ involving money and personal 
information.” In the same way, Patton and Jøsang [34] mention 
that lack of trust in e-commerce vendors (e-vendors), in 
e-commerce technology, and in the social, financial, and legal 
infrastructures of the e-commerce environment, poses a major 
challenge to the consumer acceptance of e-commerce. Petrovic et 
al. [36] speak of a paradigm shift in e-commerce from security to 
trust identifying trust as the “ultimate and decisive” indicator for 
the consumer’s willingness to engage in e-commerce transactions. 
Although electronic commerce is no longer a new phenomenon, 
our understanding of the factors and means that influence 
consumer trust in e-commerce effecting transactions between 
online companies and consumers is still limited [19], [33]. 
Therefore, the article presents a definition of consumer trust in 
e-commerce according to the trust framework model introduced in 
part 3. Providing a definition of consumer trust in e-commerce 
exemplifies the use of the trust framework model and creates a 
better understanding for consumer trust in e-commerce.  
As proposed in section 3., specifying the four components of the 
trust model will generate a clearer understanding of the domain 
addressed by researchers. By addressing consumer trust in 
e-commerce, two components of the framework are already 
specified. The consumer assumes the role of the trustor and the 
e-commerce setting institutes the trust environment. Thereby, 
e-commerce presents the legal, social, and technical surrounding 
in which the consumer operates. As e-commerce constitutes the 
environmental setting, the assumptions are made that the 
surrounding is not the trust object of e-commerce trust and that 
the consumer is general willing to operate in the e-commerce 
environment. These assumptions do not however decline the 
potential influences of the e-commerce surrounding on the 
consumer trust decision. The meaning of consumer trust in 
e-commerce to be exemplified by the framework model centers on 
a typical buying transaction between a consumer and an e-vendor 
in e-commerce. So the e-vendor assumes the role of the trustee 
5and the buying transaction represents the trust object. By 
specifying the buying transaction as the trust object, a broad 
understanding for the domain of consumer trust in e-commerce is 
presented. For example, the buying transaction incorporates the 
initial trust placed upon the web site and the trust placed upon the 
displayed information. Consequently, consumer trust in 
e-commerce can be defined according to the trust framework 
model as follows. 
Consumer trust is trust placed by a consumer in an e vendor 
concerning a buying transaction in the e-commerce environment. 
Assuming the presented definition, the trust transaction describes 
the trust formation process of a consumer over a single interaction 
with an e-vendor. The initial trust level is based upon previous 
experiences and represents the consumer’s attitudes towards the 
situation at hand before even interacting with the e-vendor. After 
entering the web site of the e-vendor, the consumer perceives the 
information provided by the e-vendor. The consumer has to 
believe for example that the privacy and security of personal and 
financial data is warranted by the e-vendor [9] and that the e-
vendor has both the ability and the motivation to deliver reliably 
goods and services of the quality expected by the consumer [17]. 
The consumer thus assesses the perceived information and 
interprets the trustworthiness of the e-vendor. As a characteristic 
of the e-commerce environment, the consumer has to depend 
exclusively on the information provided on the web site generally 
without any personal interaction with the e vendor. This 
assessment may lead to a trusting behavior that is the consumer 
purchasing a product online. The trustworthy e-vendor has then to 
fulfill the liabilities regarding the purchased product. Over the 
course of the fulfillment process, the consumer interprets the 
actual behavior of the e-vendor in comparison to the expected 
behavior resulting in endorsement or diminution of the trust level. 
Thus, the resulting trust level affects the attitudes and 
expectations of the consumer for future interactions.  
The development of the trust level over time is illustrated by the 
trust equation. The elementary statement of the trust equation is 
that consumer trust in a situational context at a point in time t+1 is 
based upon the previous trust level at t. The trust equation thus 
serves two purposes. Firstly, the trust equation formulates the 
transformation from initial trust to resulting trust. Secondly, the 
trust equation explicitly relates the elements of the trust 
framework model to the dynamic aspect of the trust transaction. 
5. CONCLUSION 
Trust has been widely studied by researchers in numerous 
disciplines, viewing trust from unique disciplinary perspectives 
and creating various definitions of trust. Although no general 
accepted agreement on the definition exists across and within 
various disciplines, the importance of trust is widely recognized 
by scholars. Acknowledging a fundamental agreement on the 
meaning of trust, a framework model for situational contexts was 
proposed in section 3. The trust situation in the framework model 
relates the trustor, the trustee, the trust object, and the trust 
environment. By specifying the four elements of the trust 
framework model, a comprehensible meaning for the trust 
situation at hand can be conceptualized. The trust situation 
displayed by the framework model of trust is embedded into a 
preceding and a subsequent phase representing an ideal sequential 
flow from initial trust to resulting trust. To introduce the dynamic aspect of trust and trust formation, the trust framework model 
incorporates the trust equation based upon the previous situational 
experiences of the trustor. Part 4. applied the trust framework 
model to the domain of consumer trust in e-commerce resulting in 
a clear definition for the domain addressed. Thereby, the 
comprehensibility and comparability for consumer trust in 
e-commerce is improved. 
6. REFERENCES 
[1] Ba, S. and Pavlou, P. A. (2002). Evidence of the Effect of 
Trust Building Technology in Electronic Markets: Price 
Premiums and Buyer Behavior. MIS Quarterly 26(3), 243 
268. 
[2] Belanger, F.; Hiller, J. S. and Smith, W. J. (2002). 
Trustworthiness in electronic commerce: the role of privacy, 
security, and site attributes. Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems 11(3-4), 245-270. 
[3] Chen, S. C. and Dhillon, G. S. (2003). Interpreting 
Dimensions of Consumer Trust in E-Commerce. Information 
Technology and Management 4(2-3), 303-318. 
[4] Corbitt, B. J.; Thanasankit, T. and Han, Y. (2003). Trust and 
e-commerce: a study of consumer perceptions. Electronic 
Commerce Research and Applications 2(3), 203-215. 
[5] Corritore, C. L.; Kracher, B. and Wiedenbeck, S. (2003). On-
line trust: concepts, evolving themes, a model. International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies 58(6), 737-758. 
[6] Deutsch, M. (1958). Trust and suspicion. Journal of Conflict 
Resolution 2(3), 265-279. 
[7] Doney, P. M and Cannon, J. P. (1997). An Examination of 
the Nature of Trust in Buyer-Seller Relationships. Journal of 
Marketing 61(2), 35-51. 
[8] Earle, T. C. and Cvetkovich, G. T. (1995). Social Trust: 
Towards a Cosmopolitan Society. Westport, Praeger. 
[9] Egger, F. N. (2003). From Interactions to Transactions: 
Designing the Trust Experience for Business-to-Consumer 
Electronic Commerce. PhD Thesis, Eindhoven University of 
Technology. 
[10] Einwiller, S. and Will, M. (2001). The Role of Reputation to 
Engender Trust in Electronic Markets. In: Proceedings of the 
5th International Conference on Corporate Reputation, 
Identity, and Competitiveness. Paris, France, May. 
[11] Gefen, D. (2002). Reflections on the Dimensions of Trust 
and Trustworthiness among online Consumers. The DATA 
BASE for Advances in Information Systems 33(3), 38-53. 
[12] Grabner-Kräuter, S. (2002). The Role of Consumers’ Trust in 
Online-Shopping. Journal of Business Ethics 39(1-2), 43-50. 
[13] Grabner-Kräuter, S. and Kaluscha, E. A. (2003). Empirical 
research in on-line trust: a review and critical assessment. 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 58(6), 
783-812. 
[14] Heath, R. L. and Bryant J. (1992). Human Communication 
Theory and Research: concepts, contexts, and challenges. 
Hillsdale, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
6[15] Herrmann, P. (2005). Trust Management Proceedings of the 
Third International Conference iTrust, Paris, France, May 
23-26, 2005. 
[16] Hoffman, D. L.; Novak, T. P. and Peralta, M. (1999). 
Building Consumer Trust Online. Communications of the 
ACM 42(4), 80-85. 
[17] Hollis, M. (1998). Trust within Reason. Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press. 
[18] Jarvenpaa, S. L.; Tractinsky, N. and Vitale, M. (2000). 
Consumer trust in an Internet store. Information Technology 
and Management 1(1-2), 45-71. 
[19] Koufaris, M. and Hampton-Sosa, W. (2004). The 
development of initial trust in an online company by new 
customers. Information and Management 41(3), 377-397. 
[20] Lee, M. K. O. and Turban, E. (2001). A Trust Model for 
Consumer Internet Shopping. International Journal of 
Electronic Commerce 6(1), 75-91. 
[21] Lewicki, R. J. and Bunker, B. B. (1995). Trust in 
relationships: a model of development and decline. In: 
Bunker, B. B. and Rubin, J. Z. (eds.) Conflict, Cooperation, 
and Justice: Essays Inspired by the work of Morton Deutsch. 
San Francisco, Jossey-Bass, 133-173. 
[22] Lewicki, R. J. and Bunker, B. B. (1996). Developing and 
Maintaining Trust in Work Relationships. In: Kramer, R. M. 
and Tyler, T. R. (eds.) Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of 
Theory and Research. Thousand Oaks, Sage Publications, 
114-139. 
[23] Lewicki, R. J.; McAllister, D. J. and Bies, R. J. (1998). Trust 
and Distrust: New Relationship and Realities. Academy of 
Management Review 23(3), 438-458. 
[24] Lewis, J. D. and Weigert, A. J. (1985). Trust as social reality. 
Social Forces 63(4), 967-985. 
[25] Luhmann, N. (1979). Trust and Power. Chichester, Wiley. 
[26] Mayer, R. C. and Davis, J. H. (1999). The Effect of the 
Performance Appraisal System on Trust in Management: A 
Field Quasi-Experiment. Journal of Applied Psychology 
84(1), 123 136. 
[27] Mayer, R. C.; Davis, J. H. and Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An 
Integrative Model of Organizational Trust. Academy of 
Management Review 20(3), 709-734. 
[28] McKnight, D. H. and Chervany, N. L. (2000). What is Trust? 
A Conceptual Analysis and an Interdisciplinary Model. In: 
Chung, M. H. (ed.) Proceedings of the Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Long Beach, California, 827-833. 
[29] McKnight, D. H. and Chervany, N. L. (2001). While Trust is 
Cool and Collected, Distrust is Fiery and Frenzied: A Model 
of Distrust Concepts. In: Proceedings of the 7th Americas 
Conference on Information Systems. Boston, Maine, USA, 
883-888. 
[30] McKnight, D. H. and Chervany, N. L. (2002). What Trust 
Means in E-Commerce Customer Relationships: An 
Interdisciplinary Conceptual Typology. International Journal 
of Electronic Commerce 6(2), 35-59. [31] McKnight, D. H.; Cummings, L. L. and Chervany, N. L. 
(1998). Initial Trust Formation in New Organizational 
Relationships. Academy of Management Review 23(3), 473-
490. 
[32] Mortensen, C. D. (1972). Communication: The Study of 
Human Interaction. New York, McGraw-Hill. 
[33] Papadopoulou, P.; Kanellis, P. and Martakos, D. (2001). 
Investigating Trust in E-Commerce: A Literature Review and 
a Model for Its Formation in Customer Relationships. In: 
Proceedings of the 7th Americas Conference on Information 
Systems. Boston, Maine, USA, 791-798. 
[34] Patton, M. A. and Jøsang, A. (2004). Technologies for Trust 
in Electronic Commerce. Electronic Commerce Research 
4(1-2), 9-21. 
[35] Pennington, R.; Wilcox, H. D. and Grover, V. (2004). The 
Role of System Trust in Business-to-Consumer Transactions. 
Journal of Management Information Systems 20(3), 197 226. 
[36] Petrovic, O.; Fallenböck, M. and Kittl, C. (2003). Paradigm 
Shift in the Network Economy: Form Security to Trust. In: 
Petrovic, O.; Posch, R. and Marhold, F. (eds.) Trust in the 
Network Economy. Evolaris vol. 2. Wien, Springer, 29-53. 
[37] Rotter, J. B. (1967). A new scale for the measurement of 
interpersonal trust. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 35(4), 651-665. 
[38] Rotter, J. B. (1971). Generalized expectancies for 
interpersonal trust. American Psychologist 26(5), 443-452. 
[39] Rousseau, D. M.; Sitkin, S. B.; Burt, R. and Camerer, C. 
(1998). Not so different after all: A cross-discipline view of 
trust. Academy of Management Review 23(3), 393-404. 
[40] Seligman, A. B. (1997). The Problem of trust. Princeton, 
Princeton University Press. 
[41] Shankar, V.; Urban, G. L. and Sultan, F. (2002). Online 
trust: a stakeholder perspective, concepts, implications, and 
future directions. Journal of Strategic Information Systems 
11(3-4), 325 344. 
[42] Shannon, C. E. and Weaver, W. (1949). The mathematical 
theory of communication. Urbana, University of Illinois 
Press. 
[43] Solomon, R. C. and Flores, F. (2001). Building Trust in 
Business, Politics, Relationships, and Life. Oxford, Oxford 
University Press. 
[44] Tan, Y.-H and Thoen, W. (2001). Toward a Generic Model 
of Trust for Electronic Commerce. International Journal of 
Electronic Commerce 5(2), 61-74. 
[45] Yousafzai, S. Y.; Pallister, J. G. and Foxall, G. R. (2003). A 
proposed model of e-trust for electronic banking. 
Technovation 23(11), 847-860. 
[46] Zucker, L. G. (1986). Production of trust: Institutional 
sources of economic structure, 1840-1920. In: B. M. Staw 
and L. L. Cummings (eds.). Research in Organizational 
Behavior, 6th ed. Greenwich, JAI Press, 53-111. 
 
7