DIALOGUES  STANDPOINT
I
Ergo, I have an angle here. Arguably, academic positions 
on religion are probably no less prone to doctrine than 
thoughtful, well-articulated papers on the joys of open-source 
software, the strategic needs of the nation-state of your choice, 
or just about any argument in economics. Presenting the 
tenets or positions of one’s faith to a community of insiders 
and outsiders requires a selection process, in much the same 
way as framed photographs require curation. I argue that 
propositions on the positive aspects of religion cherry-pick 
on two fronts: First, they attribute to religion the good done 
by indivvidual actors, just as they offer the contrast of evil 
done by nonbelievers. Second, they present hermeneutical 
traditions that allow for discursive interpretation as being at 
the heart of what it means to be a follower. I argue that, at least 
in its online manifestation, the epistemological traditions of 
religion, as well as notions of the autonomy of the believer as a 
subject, are subserviated to the function of identity creation.
A tenet of cross-cultural engagement, including the 
engagement we see in this series of articles on religion, 
relies on a predisposition for omnism, which focuses on the I don’t believe there is a God. When born, I was listed as 
Hindu since birth certificates required that as a permanent 
marker of my marital, inheritance, and taxation rights in 
India. I consider myself fairly knowledgeable in the religious 
traditions I grew up around, much as I have never been an 
active participant in ritual or attended a place of worship. 
In general, I tend to prefer the term religion , to avoid both 
the reification that comes with the notion of “faith” and its 
restriction to the inner life of the believer, but also because the 
collective nature of religious practice is central to how I see 
it practiced in social settings. However, I also do not define 
religion; that is an inherently complex and political enterprise. 
The definition of religion is a discursive and evolving exercise.
My second disclosure is that I believe there is no technology 
without the social; that is my point of departure with this 
piece. Yes, there are mindfulness apps, and Radiohead 
songs, but much of what is central to our daily experience 
of technology is social. I study social media, so my take on 
religion is centrally about its intersection with the communal, 
and by extension, the performance of the self as communal. Technology and  
Its Tree-Lined 
Avenues for  
Religion-Based 
Tribalism
  Joyojeet Pal,  University of Michigan
Insights
 →The theoretical possibilities of technologies cannot be separated from the social realities of how they are used. 
 →The dominant articulation of religion online is not through the prism of individual faith,  
but rather through performative expression of homophily. 
 →This drives tribal and chauvinistic instincts, helping further divide an already polarized world.
@INTERACTIONSMAG
46   INTERACTIONS   JULY–AUGUST 2022positive facets of one faith, including charity, discourse, truth, 
brotherhood, and the notion of an individual relationship with 
a benevolent God, rather than fundamentalism, which focuses 
exceedingly on absolute truths, and where plurality of belief 
is nested within a hierarchy. These arguments typically forgo 
the equivalence of God’s creations; it is paramount for most 
religion that it is predicated on the supremacy or chosenness 
of that social collective over all others.
I recognize that there is a body of work that powerfully 
argues that notions of secular living are predicated on 
Orientalist lines, or limited constructions of contractualist 
traditions that define the liberal nation-state as one in which 
belief is a private matter, which in and of itself predetermines 
what it means to coinhabit what a religious practice should 
be. However, I argue that the affordances of social media 
empower the instinct in religion to speak to its outer or social 
states, rather than its inner states of unmediated exchange 
with God. At the heart of my claim is that religion online 
is indistinguishable from organized religion, since the way 
canonical ideals play out in the real world are necessarily both 
performative and affective.
I see religion through the prism of the same exceptionalism 
that allows every national anthem to tell its people they 
are the best. At the same time, people from across national 
boundaries can coexist, thrive, and constantly learn from one 
another. But nations rarely tell you to join them. Once a people from a nation-state are done claiming their tribe is superior, 
that is the end, in and of itself. So whereas religion may allow 
for facets of community (belonging), practice (behaving), 
and faith (believing), the communal nature alongside the 
narcissistic reward structure of social media optimize for the 
tribal instinct of belonging. It is this belonging that defines the 
latter two within its ambit.
TRIBALISM
In opposition to notions like globalism or secularism, 
tribalism refers to a feeling of identity based on in-group 
loyalty and homophily. There are two reasons tribalism is 
fundamental to any conversation on religion and technology. 
The first relates to exclusion, which can be on the basis of 
identities that define the fault lines of multicultural societies; 
in the North American context, this may mean a coming 
together of Protestantism, Catholicism, and Judaism as 
mainstream with the exclusion of others [1]. Here, tribalism 
is enacted based on what is left out of the thus-defined 
mainstream collective. Much recent work has shown 
organized religion’s role in growing political tribalism around 
the world, strengthened by polarized virtual spaces [2].
Tribalism may also be subdivided into an infinite 
number of shifting and competing identities online based 
on persuasion at a given time. Orthodox Jewish could see 
themselves as a separate, even oppositional group to Reform 
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
JULY–AUGUST 2022   INTERACTIONS   47IMAGE BY SVETLANA BUZMAKOVA / SHUTTERSTOCK.COMDIALOGUES  STANDPOINT
Jewish in the same way that Shias may distinguish themselves 
from Sunnis, Brahmins from Dalits, and so on. Social media 
allows means for such identities to find community. This has 
value for those to whom being online is a means of finding 
community and companionship, a means of discoursing on 
or practicing religion, and several other benefits social media 
may enable.
People identifying as part of the same religion will 
not always agree that their coreligionists, or indeed they 
themselves, act in ways canonically or fundamentally defined 
by that faith. This is especially true for traditions without 
a “book” of core and agreed-upon principles. While the 
immaculacy of homophily itself may be a moving target 
from value to value, exclusion is easier. We may not agree 
on who is a Hindu, Christian, or Jew, but we agree on who 
is most definitely not. And when we need to point that out 
strategically, technology has given us uniquely powerful ways 
to do so.
Caring for one’s copassengers is a virtue mainly when one 
can’t pick them. The history of loving one’s neighbors in much 
of the world is circumscribed within the exigencies of keeping 
someone from becoming one’s neighbor, even within liberal 
states where belief is noted as a private exercise. The means 
can be legal, such as exclusionary property covenants in the 
U.S.; cultural, such as caste-defined neighborhoods in India; 
or economic, such as rent-based exclusion. The Christians 
keeping out Jews in the first half of the 20th century in 
the U.S. were regular churchgoers, just as the Brahmins 
excluding Muslim renters in India today under the guise of 
vegetarianism would claim to maintain the purity of their 
religious practice.
To claim that technology in general, or social media in 
particular, as a space for exercising religious identity would 
move subscribers away from the tribalistic inclination rejects 
what we know from history, and, indeed, more immediately, 
what we know from the past decade of social media use. 
Subscription to any imagined community helps define 
someone outside that community as an “other.” Is it possible 
to remind oneself of the core principles of benevolence and 
argumentation when one is sold on the real or imagined idea of 
existential threat?
MODERNITY, GOD, AND  
THE ENLIGHTENED COMMENTATOR
Discourse—including listening to some form of a priest or 
community leader offer a sermon or interpretation—is at 
the heart of most religious practice. However, it is also here 
that the polemics and oratorials of the leaders of that practice 
play an outsized role in defining the limits of that discourse. 
The inner state of argumentation, for the individual believer, 
is contoured by the extant norms of the community—
whether defined by its leaders or its colloquial practice. Does 
technology allow deviance from this immanently majoritarian 
instinct?
It is important a priori to critically examine what is being 
presented as a desirable social ethic. Religion does not align 
with morality or criminality [3]; religiosity corresponds 
to attempts to corner institutions for means that suit the 
majority [4], and studies generally agree it is social capital 
(which ironically is fortified endogenously in religious groups) 
that most aligns with both reduced propensity to commit 
crime as well as success in society. Given these, what do we, as a group of academics, neither trained in theology or 
polemics, offer as a framework for thinking about religion and 
technology?
Contrary to the popular assumption that the majority 
of professors are atheists, university faculty, while lower in 
religiosity than the average citizen, are majority believers, 
and much more likely to profess faith than subscribe to 
agnostic or atheist positions [5]. So we are part of a system 
whose prerogative is to welcome the capital of those who 
do not share the same beliefs dominant in our institutions. 
The embrace of secularism offers a cache of legitimacy, as 
summarized by Storm Bailey, speaking for the values of 
religion-affiliated higher education: “We think or speak of 
schools as being pretty good academically in spite of their 
church or religious affiliation” [6]. The notion of truth seeking, 
so fundamental to many religious traditions around the world, 
cannot be predicated on the predefinition of certain truths in 
environments where embracing this diversity is necessary for 
the financial sustainability of the system.
So is the university system, or a set of academics from it, 
who are probably less axiomatic on religion than the average 
person, likely to have the legitimacy to speak for a people? 
What we have here may also be a foundational disadvantage 
of interdisciplinary fields, where the voice thus heard is 
restricted to that which can translate for the community of 
practice, here that being HCI. This article should really have 
been written by a Hindu priest or at least a theologian, but 
instead, I was the one available. Nobody, outside of a subset 
of academics, cares to hear what a group of academics think is 
relevant or recommended as behavior vis-à-vis religion. And 
those academics already have the social capital and access to 
discursive tradition that we aim to sell here.
HINDU RELIGION AND SOCIAL TECHNOLOGY
The Hindu religion has a complex relationship with 
technology, modernity, and by extension, with its most recent 
avatar, social media. Although religious practice has had a 
generally positive dispensation to science, given that it was 
restricted as a vocation to the highest-ranked members of 
society—Brahmins—there were also traditional strictures 
that aimed to carefully guard access to knowledge. Various 
acts of engaging with people outside of one’s own such as 
Samudra Langhana , or crossing the seas, would negate a 
person’s varna status (caste, simplified) among Hindus [7]. 
Essentially, the goal of religious structures has traditionally 
been to regulate and restrict access to knowledge and 
technology rather than make it equitable.
The Samudra Langhana is a defining characteristic 
of Indian aspiration in the modern, technology-driven 
economy. The Hindu who crossed the seas gained access to 
the technology jobs and the knowledge, wealth, and status 
that came with them. It was also true that this community of 
Hindus who crossed the seas weren’t those at the bottom of 
the caste ladder, unless they were moved as bonded laborers 
or, more recently, economic migrants. An overwhelming 
majority of Indians who have made it in the technology 
economy are not only upper caste but also elites within 
that. Paradoxically, while a disengagement with scriptural 
proposition may have served as an enabler for that access to 
foreign lands, it is this religious identity of upper-caste Hindus 
that has consolidated its dominance on Indian society, in part 
through its early monopolization of online worlds. It is also 
@INTERACTIONSMAG
48   INTERACTIONS   JULY–AUGUST 2022this demographic that is frequently credited with sowing the 
seeds of a technology- and social-media-driven polarization on 
religious lines that has come to define contemporary India [8].
As with other religious groups, online spaces have served as 
a means for Hindu religious practice as well as the declaration 
and consolidation of identity. Online spaces, starting with 
electronic bulletin boards and blogs, but especially with the 
advent of social media, have served much the same purpose 
for Hindus as they have for other communities: providing a 
space for building communities, for doctrinal discussion, for 
religious education, and for expressing personal faith.
These communities of expatriate technology workers were 
among the earliest to systematically champion the divisive 
politics of Hindutva (a notion of society based on Hindu 
values) and they contributed to the Hindu right holding the 
vanguard in weaponizing social media as an electoral tool, 
well before it was a hegemonic power in Indian politics [9]. 
Indeed, the use of technology helped the religious right move 
away from an association with reactionary social dominance 
and instead base its superior position in the caste hierarchy on 
a global, Internet-savvy political movement [10]. These virtual 
movements intersected with mainstream media early, and 
focused on the notion of Hinduism as a community of joint 
action against a political other—be it the secular political 
establishment of the time, or more recently, Muslims [11].
The years since, if anything, have been a spiral of 
divisiveness based on religion in ways never seen before, and 
multiple studies have shown that technology and social media 
have been central drivers of these movements. While, in 
theory, social media can be used for the individual, meditative 
aspects of religious practice, its overwhelmingly larger 
footprint is in its deleterious effects on polarization, and it is 
impossible to ignore that this polarization is happening along 
the tribally defined lines of who is in and who is out. Today, 
groups defined by religion can and regularly do engage in hate 
speech targeted toward other religions, egged on by politicians 
and groups that would never have the kind of access to 
disruptive broadcast speech were it not for social media. For 
Hindus opposed to this increasingly dominant worldview, the 
challenge of being on social media is drowning in cacophonies 
of hate or competitive reinforcement, or preparing themselves 
for aggressive confrontation when presenting contrarian 
positions. These consequences of religion-based tribalism 
are not theoretical anymore; people are killed because of 
religion-based polarization online. We cannot ask the targets 
of such speech to be reflective and ignore the calls for their 
blood in favor of a meditative engagement; instead, we need 
to acknowledge as our starting point that religion has been 
weaponized, and nothing in our history has allowed this to be 
done with as much effectiveness as social media.
CONCLUSION
Most religious texts are products of patriarchy, and of a 
very specific time period. While the foundational tenet of 
detachment from worldly concerns may cut across ages, 
you would make for quite an ironic Buddhist if you were 
attached to the number of followers you have on Instagram. 
Most epistemological positions on sexuality or morality 
derived from religious orthodoxy would likely inspire a few 
equivalents of the Catholic Hail Mary for engaging with much of the content we see online. But we as a society choose not to 
legislate away most online content that would be anathema to 
strict interpretations of morality, at least on a spectrum, not 
only because capital is an adequately powerful God but also 
because allowing one tribe’s definition of propriety is at best 
mildly offensive to some, and possibly catastrophic to others.
That religion is spotty in providing any differential effect 
on morality should be an important lesson. Faith, or the idea 
that authenticity in religious practice relies on agency, should 
be disaggregated from the fact that religion is articulated as 
a coercive force that gains its momentum in numbers and 
organization. Individual morality, in whatever meditative 
form it takes between the participant and the entity, does not 
have to be restricted to people of a group based on faith—if 
anything, it ought to be better suited to the rejection of 
tribalism.
People of a tribe will attack those of another, irrespective 
of whether the nature or object of attack is discouraged 
by thoughtful reading of what makes it a tribe. The gauge 
thus is not the tenets of the tribe, but rather what allows it 
to successfully be a tribe online. We must give up claims 
that religion as personal is somehow different from religion 
as communal when it, like technology itself, is necessarily 
communal, political, and geopolitical. Assertions that 
religious practice can be disengaged from our virtual 
collective lives assumes that what has already failed in our 
collective experience of the public sphere will work in a new 
idealistic regime of civility and mindfulness.
There are monasteries for a reason, and there are self-help 
books for another.
Endnotes
1. Putnam, R.D. and Campbell, D.E. American Grace: How Religion 
Divides and Unites Us . Simon & Schuster, New York, 2012.
2. Lajevardi, N. and Abrajano, M. How negative sentiment toward 
Muslim Americans predicts support for Trump in the 2016 
presidential election. The Journal of Politics 81 , 1 (2019), 296–302.
3. Duriez, B. and Soenens, B. Religiosity, moral attitudes and moral 
competence: A critical investigation of the religiosity-morality 
relation. International Journal of Behavioral Development 30 , 1 
(2006), 76–83.
4. Hunter, J.D. Culture Wars: The Struggle to Control the Family, Art, 
Education, Law, and Politics in America . Avalon Publishing, 1992.
5. Gross N. and Simmons, S. The social and political views of 
American professors. Harvard University Symposium on Professors 
and Their Politics . 2007, 41
6. Bailey, S. Uneasy partners? Religion and academics. Intersections 
2001 , 11 (2001), 6.
7. Olivelle, P. Dharmasutras: The Law Codes of Apastamba, Gautama, 
Baudhayana and Vasistha . Motilal Banarsidass, 2000.
8. Rai, A.S. India on-line: Electronic bulletin boards and the 
construction of a diasporic Hindu identity. Diaspora: A Journal of 
Transnational Studies 4 , 1 (1995), 31–57.
9. Robinson, R. Religion on the net: An analysis of the global reach of 
Hindu fundamentalism and its implications for India. Sociological 
Bulletin 50 , 2 (2001), 212–221.
10. Therwath, I. Cyber-hindutva: Hindu nationalism, the diaspora and 
the Web. Social Science Information 51 , 4 (2012), 551–577.
11. Rajagopal, A. Politics After Television: Hindu Nationalism and the 
Reshaping of the Public in India . Cambridge Univ. Press, 2001.
 Joyojeet Pal is an associate professor at the School of Information at 
the University of Michigan.
 →joyojeet@umich.edu
DOI: 10.1145/3539492  COPYRIGHT HELD BY AUTHOR. PUBLICATION RIGHTS LICENSED TO ACM. $15.00
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
JULY–AUGUST 2022   INTERACTIONS   49