IkI r 
~ =j j 
i 
k~~ ople with Dlsabili~ 
....... e O 0 I .......... 0 0 I I I I I .... O • I e I ~ ..... Q ~ ~ ..... ~ e ...... 0 ~ Q ......... ~ I ~ ~ ~ 0 I e ~ ~ J e ~ ....... ~ ......... 
slower in coming. 
What is being done? At the Gen- 
eral Services Administration, Susan 
Brummel directs the Clearinghouse 
for Computer Accommodation, 
which provides a variety of informa- 
tion on new and existing assistive 
technologies, public laws, policies, 
and practices. For over 30 years, the 
Veterans Administration has sup- 
ported work in rehabilitation engi- 
neering; many interesting projects 
have resulted from this effort. The 
National Science Foundation has 
funded several individual research 
efforts, as well as some 
special projects. For ex- 
ample, NSF cofunded the ...... % .... • .::::::;:. 
"First National Search 
for Computer Applica- 
tions for Persons with 
Disabilities" in 1980, 
and the "Second Na- 
tional Search" in 1991, 
both of which generated 
many innovative ideas 
which have since been 
developed into commer- 
cial products. Through 
its Small Business Inno- 
vative Research (SBIR) 
program, NSF has also 
funded small companies 
developing assistive 
technologies. 
Three major pieces of legislation 
relating to people with disabilities 
have been enacted in recent years by 
the federal government: 
• Section 508 of Public Law 99-506 
(1986) 
• The Technology Related Assistance 
for Individuals with Disabilities Act 
of 1988 (Public Law 100-407) 
• The Americans with Disabilities 
Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-336) 
These laws establish guidelines for 
access to electronic equipment in the 
federal workplace. They also make 
funds available--to assist the states in 
their efforts to improve access for 
people with disabilities, to support 
individual research projects, and to 
provide graduate fellowships for peo- 
ple with disabilities. There is more to 
be done. Private institutions and 
foundations must play a greater role. 
Most important, the prevailing com- puter culture must be changed. 
Consider, for example, the win- 
dow-based interfaces that come with 
most modern personal computers 
and workstations. Menus, resource 
fries or other hooks are typically pro- 
vided to allow users to customize 
their working environment to suit 
their personal tastes. Windows can 
be repositioned and resized; fore- 
ground and background colors can 
be changed. The size and style of the 
font used to display text can often 
be adjusted. Sometimes, even key- 
board functionality (bindings) can 
iii!i 
In::%z;this paper, we will des 
...... ~!i~::i~ ~ ...... 
speci"~i::i.cally designed with 
.... ~:i~%i::ii ...... iiiii 
enumerat~::~d~::. MAGNE~ is writ 
...... ~;:;:~ ...... :.iii::i 
{ \it Amiga }"::::~ii~:~amil~ of pers .... i:!~!)~ ...... ::i::iii 
target machines::z~i::i;~b~th hecau 
supported and the!i~ir afford ::::::::::: 
individuals for their pers 
Figure 1. Schematic view of the MAGNEX display with cross-hair cursor 
be reconfigured. 
Options such as these are no less 
(and perhaps more) valuable for vis- 
ually handicapped users than they 
are for users at large, but they are 
not enough. What is required are 
mechanisms for fundamentally mod- 
ifying the visual aspects of the display 
in conjunction with the manner in 
which information is conveyed. In 
the absence of such mechanisms, 
modern window-based interfaces are 
more often a curse than a blessing to 
handicapped individuals. 
One solution is to design innova- 
tive software tools. An excellent 
example is provided by IBM's 
ACCESS-DOS systems software tools 
for their personal computers. These 
have been distributed free of charge 
since the late spring of 1991, and allow people who suffer from a vari- 
ety of physical disabilities (e.g., 
cerebral palsy) to use conventional 
input devices. A second example is 
Rudy Vener's MAGNEX editor for 
the Commodore Amiga personal 
computer [3], which features a novel 
cross-hair cursor to help people who 
suffer from severe tunnel vision in 
locating the current typing position. 
While one of the two converging lines 
which comprise the cross-hair is 
vertical, as would be expected, the 
other is anchored at one endpoint to 
the upper left-hand corner of the 
screen, as schematically 
shown in Figure 1. The 
diagonal component of 
the cross-hair provides a 
constant initial reference 
point, from which the 
eye is drawn naturally 
down to where the 
diagonal and horizontal 
lines intersect. This per- 
mits the eye to rapidly 
home in on the appro- 
priate character. 
Quite another ap- 
proach has been suc- 
cessfully employed in 
Blissymbolics [5], a 
semantically based visual 
language that has proved 
remarkably effective as the basis of 
alternative communication systems 
for people who are severely disabled. 
The language contains a core 
vocabulary of over 2,400 symbols. 
Although some of these are pic- 
tographs which depict the outline or 
shape of the object they represent, 
most are ideographs that derive from 
a fixed set of so-called key graphic 
forms, each having a well-defined 
root meaning associated with it; 
see Figure 2. Users who need to ex- 
pand the system can do so by mod- 
ifying existing symbols and/or by 
generating new ones by applying 
logical strategies and simple syntactic 
rules. In the HYPERBLISS system 
developed by Shalit et al., for the 
Apple Macintosh personal computer 
[6], the user applies his/her acquired 
knowledge of the structure of Blis- 
symbolics ideographs to synthesize 
or approximate (in his/her mind) 
34 May 1992/Vol.35, No.5/COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM.... 0 • • t I • • • • ..... I I J ~ • 40 ....... JO JOtlQ411001#OQIO~IO ........ O • 0 O ....... O ..... 8 a 4 ~ ........ ~ ~ O O O O O 6 O 0 O • 
the graphical representation of the 
object he/she wishes to "talk" about. 
The user then retrieves the desired 
symbol by selecting one of its compo- 
nent parts from the keyboard. 
As illustrated by the preceding 
examples, it is not possible to give 
adequate representation, in just a few 
papers, to the broad spectrum of 
research relating to people with dis- 
abilities. Even if we could do so, there 
would be little point, for most readers 
would then miss the forest for the 
trees. We have therefore elected to 
divide the space allotted to us be- 
tween two different types 
of articles. 
The first article, by 
Brown, provides an over- 
view of several different 
types of currently avail- 
able assistive technology. 
Specific references to 
products and manufac- 
turers should prove 
especially valuable to 
many readers. The 
authors also suggest pre- 
scriptions for possible 
future uses of technology 
to improve access for 
people with disabilities. 
The remainder of the 
articles in our special sec- 
tion describe specific research projects 
in various stages of completion. The 
lion's share of such work, both by the 
editors of this special section [4, 9] and 
by others [2, 8], has focused on the 
needs of people who are blind or 
otherwise visually impaired. The four 
articles that comprise this part of the 
special section focus on a very dif- 
ferent and no less important segment 
of the disabled community, namely 
people who have problems commu- 
nicating with their peers because of 
hearing impairments, degenerative 
diseases or severe injury. The articles 
by Alm, Arnott and Newell, and by 
Pausch and Williams, discuss two ap- 
proaches to providing speech syn- 
thesizers for people who are nonvocal. 
The article by Demasco and McCoy 
proposes a solution to some of the 
problems faced by people who suffer 
from cerebral palsy and similar 
disorders when they need to input text to a computer. Finally, Kukich dis- 
cusses improvements to the tele- 
communications network for the deaf. 
We think that all five of the articles 
included here are excellent examples 
of the high quality, exciting, and 
socially relevant research that can be 
carried out in an effort to develop and 
apply assistive technology. 
Those who would like more in- 
formation about issues relating to 
computers and people with dis- 
abilities are encouraged to contact 
ACM's newly revitalized Special 
Interest Group on Computers and 
× 
1, 1,. 1,+ 
±@ 
@+@ r ×l 
±+@ 
Figure 2. Examples of BliSsymbolics 
Ideographs (after Shalit et al.) Top row 
(left to right): I, my, our. Middle row: 
resident, residential institution. 
Bottom row: school, teacher 
the Physically Handicapped 
(SIGCAPH), which now publishes a 
quarterly newsletter. SIGCAPH is 
also planning a research-oriented 
conference for 1993, to focus on the 
leading edge technology in this field. 
Acknowledgment 
We would like to thank all of the 
referees for graciously donating their 
time to review and comment on this 
special section. [] 
References 
1. Brown, C. Oral communication, 1989. 
2. Edwards, A.D.N. Sound Track: An audi- 
tory interface for blind users. Human-Comput. 
Intcc. 4, 1 (1989), 45-66. 
3. Edwards, A.D.N., Brummel, S., Vander- 
heiden, G., and Williges, R.C. Call for participation. CHI'91 Workshop on Human- 
Computer Interaction and Users with Special Needs 
(1991) (distributed via email). 
4. Glinert, E.E, and Ladner, R.E. A large- 
font virtual terminal interface: A software 
prosthesis for the visually impaired. Commun. 
ACM 27, 6 (June 1984), 567-572. 
5. Helfman, E.S. Blissymbolics: Speaking With- 
out Speech. Elsevier Nelson, N.Y., N.Y., 1981. 
6. Shalit, A., Boonzaier, D. A., Underhill, 
L.G., and Williams-Short, R. Multidimen- 
sional scaling of Blissymbolics data. Int. Res. 
Rep., Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, 
University of Cape Town, 1988. 
7. Vener, A.R., and Glinert, E.P MAGNEX: 
A text editor for the visually impaired. In Pro- 
ceedings ~ the 16th A nnual A CM 
Computer Science Conference 
(Atlanta, Feb. 1988) pp. 23-25. 
8. Weber, G., Gestures as a 
means for the blind to interact 
with a computer. In Proceedings 
of the Second IFIP Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction 
(INTERACT '87) (Stuttgart, 
Germany, Sept. 1-4, 1987), 
pp. 593-595. 
9. York, B. W. and Karshmer, 
A. I. Tools to support blind 
programmers. In Proceedings of 
the 17th Annual ACM Computer 
Science Conference (Louisville, 
Ky., Feb. 21-23, 1989), pp. 5-11. 
About the Authors: 
EPHRAIM P. GLINERT is 
an associate professor of computer science at 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. In addition 
to computer-based assistive technology for the 
handicapped, his current research interests 
include visual and multimodal human- 
computer interfaces, multiparadigm pro- 
gramming languages and systems, and soft- 
ware engineering tools for large-scale projects. 
In 1991 he was elected chair of SIGCAPH, 
ACM's Special Interest Group for Computers 
and the Physically Handicapped. Author's 
Present Address: Department of Computer 
Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, 
NY 12180; email: glinert@cs.rpi.edu 
BRYANT W. YORK is an associate professor 
and director of research at the College of 
Computer Science at Northeastern Uni- 
versity. His interests include his design 
of a programming environment for blind 
programmers, organization of the 1989 NSF- 
sponsored workshop on Computers and 
Persons with Disabilities (CAPD), and work 
in the area of algorithms for massively parallel 
computation. Author's Present Address: 
College of Computer Science, Northeastern 
University, Boston, MA 02115; email: 
york@dworkin.ccs, northeastern.edu 
COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM/May 1992/Vo1.35, No.5 3 S