becoming more complicated. Yet, as 
Kristina Höök claims (https:/ /www.
youtube.com/watch?v=zohoISiOZmQ ), 
when it comes to home, focus on 
automation persists in HCI design 
and research, while the much-needed 
attention to somaesthetics remains 
sidelined. Even in somaesthetic 
discussions, sexuality is rarely 
considered as crucial or a priority. Home 
feels almost devoid of sex, especially of 
sexual pleasures. No doubt there are 
people dreaming of precisely such a 
home, but there are many who do not. 
(Disclaimer: we don’t.)
Compared to the efforts around 
women’s reproductive health in 
particular (e.g., period trackers), those 
around sexual pleasures and desires 
remain far less visible. But why? 
Lauren Berlant offered a convincing 
explanation (https:/ /www.youtube.
com/watch?v=h7X6j0af7Bo): “Sex and 
sexuality as normalized offshoots of 
pleasure are not seen as a resource for 
social transformation but a problem that 
wedges social reproduction. Having no 
movement public for amplifying their 
resonance or their effects, they are seen 
as ethical modalities falsely privatized 
as transactions between individuals.”
Beyond the normal and normative, 
from the queer to kinky, interaction 
design has kept everything in 
between in the hot and stuffy closet of 
subversion. Now we must take the (hi)
story of sexual technologies seriously, 
as Bo Ruberg [5] has in disavowing 
patriarchal fantasy portrayed as 
facts, starting with dames de voyage 
to seemingly straight yet palpably 
queer sex tech. Now we must take kink 
seriously, as R.O. Kwon and Garth 
Greenwell [6] have in their anthology 
of short fiction by the same name, 
and challenge the dominant culture 
of pathologizing, flattening, and Our first encounter with 
each other involved 
pleasure. It was on 
Susanna’s part. She 
invited Jaz to her home 
and cooked such a 
memorable dinner 
that Jaz would often refer to it over 
the following years in their research 
into FoodCHI (food-computer-human 
interaction [1]). The discussion during 
dinner led to one of Susanna’s research 
topics: sneakerporn —not the widely 
practiced online flaunting of special-
edition footwear but rather a DIY porn 
category involving sexually explicit 
contact with sneakers [2]. There began 
our journey, one escapade of which is this 
column: We invite you on a quick visit 
to the kinky, leaky, and opaque space in 
between sexual intimacies and data.
Back in the 1970s, the cultural 
studies scholar Raymond Williams [3] 
described the introduction of telephone, 
radio, and television into 20th-century 
homes as “mobile privatisation,” a mode 
of living at once home-centered and 
mobile in its technological attachments 
and connections to the outside world 
(relatedly, see Toyo Ito’s Pao I and Pao II: 
https:/ /socks-studio.com/2016/02/07/
pao-dwellings-for-the-tokyo-nomad-
woman-by-toyo-ito-1985-and-1989/). 
Such permeability, or leakiness, became 
increasingly manifest with widening 
access to the Internet, to the point that 
the spaces and devices of labor and 
leisure have long been blurred for many 
[4]. These include those for sexual and 
intimate connections, from phone sex 
to online dating and location-based 
hookup apps, and from porn viewing to 
camming, self-shooting, and sexting.
Yet nothing quite prepared us for 
the Covid-19 pandemic when much of 
sociality—and work—suddenly shifted 
online. During lockdowns, the use of social media soared. So did access 
to porn and sex sites, with OnlyFans 
trending as both content producers 
and audiences flocked to the platform. 
Alongside Zoom work meetings, Zoom 
sex parties gained traction, which came 
with the service warning that such 
events were against the company’s 
terms of use for keeping users safe, 
at the same time that public health 
professionals were recommending these 
very uses were the safe and responsible 
thing to do.
Amid such lively emergences and 
contrasts we see (at least) two major 
things to consider here: the degree to 
which discussions of domesticity and 
the home, particularly in interaction 
design, dodge the issue and practices 
of sexuality, despite these being 
normatively confined precisely to such 
spaces, and the question of what we 
understand as or with sexual intimacy 
in networked environments.
First, let’s take home. It has been an 
important theme in interaction design. 
From the smart home discourse to 
the more recently emerging interest 
in other-than-human domestic 
companions ranging from plants and 
animals to algorithmic creatures in 
parallel with the broader social and 
ecological crises, the understandings, 
experiences, and possibilities of 
intimacy and/at/with home are Kinky, Leaky, Opaque:  
Sexual Intimacies and Data
What is at stake when 
a sex technology 
records sessions of 
its use and shares 
the data in ways not 
only unclear but also 
unknown to the user? 
@INTERACTIONSMAG
16   INTERACTIONS   MARCH–APRIL 2023  
COLUMN  THE CO-
Jaz Hee-jeong Choi, 
RMIT University COLUMN  THE CO-
Susanna Paasonen, 
University of Turkuaccumulate, such opacity is by no 
means easy for the users of devices 
and platforms to manage, let alone 
control. Opacity, as discussed by 
Sundén, connects with notions of 
privacy and safety where it is not sex or 
sexuality that is perceived as risky but 
rather disclosures extending beyond 
the sexual cultures and publics that 
one participates in. To thrive, these 
cultures need both physical spaces and 
networked connections mindful of the 
centrality of sexual pleasure for people’s 
well-being and of design practices 
and use policies respectful of partial 
visibilities. This is where we end this 
escapade with you. What questions 
came up for you? What sideways are we 
not looking at or feeling? All of it, we 
encourage you to explore. Come.
Endnotes
1. Choi, J.H-j., Foth, M., and Hearn, G.N. 
Eat Cook Grow: Mixing Human-Computer 
Interactions with Human-Food Interactions.  
MIT Press, Boston, 2014.
2. Paasonen, S. Disturbing, fleshy images: 
Close looking at pornography. In Working 
with Affect in Feminist Readings: Disturbing 
Differences . M. Liljeström and S. Paasonen, 
eds. Routledge, London, 2010, 58–71.
3. Williams, R.  Television: Technology and 
Cultural Form. Routledge, London, 1975/1997.
4. Gregg, M. Work’s Intimacy. Polity, Oxford, 
2011.
5. Ruberg, B. Sex Dolls at Sea Imagined 
Histories of Sexual Technologies.  MIT Press, 
Boston, 2022.
6. Kwon, R.O. and Greenwell, G. Kink.  
Scribner UK, 2021.
7. Sundén, J. Play, secrecy and consent: 
Theorizing privacy breaches and 
sensitive data in the world of networked 
sex toys. Sexualities  (2020). DOI: 
1363460720957578
8. Sundén, J. Tracing sexual otherness in 
Sweden: The opacity of online kink. 
Lambda Nordica.  Forthcoming.
 Jaz Hee-jeong Choi  is the director of 
the Care-full Design Lab, Vice-Chancellor’s 
Principal Research Fellow, and associate 
professor in design at RMIT University in 
Melbourne, Australia.
 →jaz.hee-jeong.choi@rmit.edu.au
 Susanna Paasonen  is a professor of media 
studies at the University of Turku in Finland, 
and the author of  NSFW: Sex, Humor, and Risk in 
Social Media  (MIT Press, 2019) and Dependent, 
Distracted, Bored: Affective Formations in 
Networked Media (MIT Press, 2021).
 →suspaa@utu.fiyet collective and public within the 
confines of the group. The crafting of 
such publics of limited visibility is key 
to kink and queer cultures as sites of 
sexual sociability and play, relational 
spaces that are necessary for the 
sustenance of certain lives and to create 
new possibilities for change. Such spaces 
call us to pay attention to Sundén’s 
[8] argument on the value of opacity 
in and for sexual lives: Sites of partial 
visibilities exist, importantly so, beyond 
what may be quantified through sensors 
and analytics algorithms. Specifically, 
such opaque spaces are where the full 
openness of sexual lives may not be 
desirable, or possible, but where there is 
no desire for the closet either.
As data traces of our interactions, 
sexual and otherwise, leak and 
DOI: 10.1145/3583132  COPYRIGHT HELD BY AUTHORSsimplifying kinky desires into shame, 
and instead call for the treatment of 
kink as a tool to make sense of our lives, 
among other exciting and genuine 
possibilities. Acknowledging and 
working with the banality, diversity, 
and importance of sexual pleasures will, 
at least and at last, help us understand 
and imagine interactions that take into 
account the richness of human lives.
Further, as Kwon and Greenwell 
suggest, we will do well to recognize 
“how the questions raised in intimate, 
kinky encounters—questions of power, 
agency, identity— can help us to 
interrogate and begin to re-script the 
larger cultural narratives that surround 
us.… [K]ink can also deepen and 
complicate urgent conversations around 
how consent is established, negotiated, 
and sometimes broken.” The matter of 
consent is particularly resonant in the 
21st century of mobile privatization, 
which has become crucially about 
permeability and leakiness of the 
uncanny sort, as smart devices demand 
to listen to our interactions as the 
prerequisite to their operability.
This takes us to the second question 
around our understanding of sexual 
intimacy in networked environments: 
For what is at stake when a sex 
technology records sessions of its use 
and shares the data in ways not only 
unclear but also unknown to the user? 
Tackling this question, and taking a cue 
from kink negotiations over consent, 
Jenny Sundén [7] argues that such 
leakiness calls for de-linking of intimacy 
from privacy—for understanding 
networked sexual play as “highly 
intimate and personal, but hardly 
private” so that sexuality itself can 
become framed “as a publicly accessible 
culture and as something which is 
sustained through collective practices 
(rather than a form of individual 
property).”
Returning to sneakerporn , the 
example that had so captivated 
Susanna’s attention, resulted from 
networked sexual play of the vintage, 
Usenet kind, unfolding in an alt.sex.
fetish group where users invited one 
another to imagine what such porn 
might look like, and to act out and share 
scenarios. This networked play was 
not necessarily of the intimate sort, The Sexinsitu project by Martyne Miller 
takes the form of a self-producing archive. 
The basic units are video recordings of 
physical reconstructions of particular sexual 
memories of the participants, performed 
solo, recalling the shared moments. The 
work provokes questions about the role and 
function of the body, mind, and memory in 
the process of experiencing pleasure, loving, 
and/or forming relationships, and about sex 
as a personal but not private matter. Its aim is 
to restore the social dimension of sexuality. 
The original image included in this column 
was replaced to meet the ACM content policy 
requirement. 
INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG
MARCH–APRIL 2023   INTERACTIONS   17