Deploying Human -Centered Machine 
Learning to Improve Adolescent Online 
Sexual Risk  Detection  Algorithms
Abstract  
As adolescents ’ engagement increases online, it 
becomes more essential to provide a safe environment 
for them. Although some apps and systems  are 
available for keeping teens safer online, these 
approaches and apps do not consider the needs of 
parents and teens. We would like to improve adolescent 
online sexual risk detection algorithms. In order to do 
so, I’ll conduct three research studies for my 
dissertation: 1) Qualitative analysis on teen s posts on 
an online peer support platform about online sexual 
risks in order to gain deep understanding of online 
sexual risks 2) Train a machine learning approach to 
detect sexual risks based on teens conversations  with 
sex offenders  3) develop a machine learning algorithm 
for detecting online sexual risks specialized for 
adolescents . 
Author Keywords  
Adolescent Online Safety ; Human -centered Machine 
Learning; Online sexual risks .  
ACM Classification Keywords  
•Human -centered computing~Empirical 
studies in HCIPermission to make digital or hard copies of a ll or part of this work for 
personal or  classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed  for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full  citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for compon ents of this work owned by others  than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise,  or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific  
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from  
Permissions@acm.org.  
GROUP '20 Companion, January 6 –8, 2020, Sanibel Island, FL, USA  
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.  
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.  
ACM ISBN 978 -1-4503-6767-7/20/01…$15.00  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3323994.3372138  Afsaneh Razi  
Department of Computer Science 
University of Central Florida  
Orlando, FL 32826,USA  
Afsaneh.razi@ knights. ucf.edu   
157
GROUP '20 Companion, January 6–8, 2020, Sanibel Island, FL, USA
Doctoral ConsortiumMotivation and Background  
As adolescents have access to  the internet more than 
ever, protecting and provid ing a safe online experience 
becomes more important. According to Pew Research 
Center [10], about half of the teens (45%) are ‘almost 
constantly’ online  and most (71%) have social media 
account . Although the internet provides a lot of 
opportunities for teens, it also expose s them to online 
risks [6]. According to Crimes  Against Children 
Research Center, 1 in 11 teens in the U.S. have  
experience d unwanted sexual solicitations, 1 in 9 are 
victims of cyberbullying, and 1 in 4 are exposed to  
explicit sexual materials online  [7]. One of the most 
common types of online risks is online sexual risks  [4]. 
Available solutions for adolescent online safety  are 
mostly d evice-based restrictions and parental 
monitoring apps [3]. Though these approaches do not 
take into consideration the context of which risks 
happen, so they overwhelm parents with huge amount 
of teens’ data. Also they are privacy -invasive to teens 
[3]. Therefore,  risk detection algorithms need to take  
into account the context that an online risk happens to 
be more useful for parents and less privacy -invasive to 
teens.   
Machine learning algorithms need  high-quality  training  
datasets  to learn key attributes of data in order to 
create intelligent  systems to detect a particular 
phenomenon of interest  [9]. So, the ground truth or 
labels of a training dataset  determines how much a risk 
detection algorithm  is effective . Most of the training 
datasets used in prior research to detect  online  sexual 
risks are not representative of or generalizable to  
adolescents  because there are not based on teens ’ real-
world data . 
158
GROUP '20 Companion, January 6–8, 2020, Sanibel Island, FL, USA
In addition, most of the qualitative research on the 
topic of adolescent online safety has historically relied 
on teen-self-reports than utilizing social media trace 
data [8].  Although usually in these self-reported 
studies participants were assured that their answers 
would remain anonymous, it might be possible that 
teens do not want to disclose this information and 
provide socially desirable answers. Therefore, utilizing 
real-world adolescent social media data to analyze 
sexual behaviors will help the community to have a 
better understanding of adolescent sexual risks. 
In this dissertation study, we direct our attention 
toward a better understanding of the sexual content 
that adolescents exchange online and developing 
algorithms that can detect these risks accurately. The 
primary goals of this research are to 1) develop a 
better understanding of how adolescents engage in 
online sexual experiences. 2) Create contextual training 
datasets for adolescent online risk detection. 3) 
Improve online risk detection systems.  
The following are associated research questions that we 
are going to examine: 
RQ1- What types of sexual experiences and risks do 
teens experience online? 
RQ2- How qualitative insight could be operationalized 
into viable sexual risk models for labeling datasets in 
which to train algorithms to detect adolescent online 
sexual risks? 
RQ3- How can adolescent online sexual risk detection 
algorithms be improved? 
Doctoral ConsortiumProposed Methods  
In my dissertation study , I am planning to use different 
types  of methods in order to answer the research 
questions and tackle the problem. This includes  using 
qualitative an alysis in order to understand online sexual 
risks better, and then create rich training dataset to 
train machine learning models on that.  
First study  (Addressing RQ1) : For my first 
dissertation study, I conducted a thematic content 
analysis of  4,180 posts by teens ages 12 -17 on an 
online peer support forum to uncover what and how 
teens talk about their online sexual interactions with 
others.  We found that teens used the platform to seek 
support (83%), connect with others (15%), and give 
advice (5%) ab out sexting, their sexual orientation, 
sexual abuse, and explicit content. In addition, we 
found that f emale teens often received unwanted nudes 
from strangers . But their main struggle  was with how 
to turn down sexting requests from people they knew  
such a s friends and their significant other . I conducted 
this research to gain more  insight into the online sexual 
experiences of teens and how they seek support around 
these issues.  By understanding the online sexual 
experiences of teens, we can create richer training sets 
based on their real experiences.   
Second study  (Addressing RQ2 and RQ3):  Most of 
the research in  the area of online sexual risk detection 
[1,2,5]  used p erverted justice  [11] public dataset  from 
convicted sex offender and volunteers acting as teens . 
Almost all  of the rese arch in this area focused on 
detecting the predators with acceptable accuracy of 
93% form PAN competition [12]. Though researchers 
where not successful on identifying predatory lines 
(47%  accuracy). My aim is  to examine predatory 
159
GROUP '20 Companion, January 6–8, 2020, Sanibel Island, FL, USA
conversations from victims’ perspectives . Also, I would 
want to improve the algorithm for finding predatory 
lines. In order to do this, I will create a rich dataset to 
serve our purpose then I will develop appropriate 
machine learning to detect online predatory risks. 
Third study (Addressing RQ2 and RQ3):  In the last 
study, my objective is to collect Instagram data of 
teens in order to train and evaluate risk detection 
algorithms. Analyzing Instagram data is chosen 
because it is used by more than 70% of adolescents in 
the U.S.[ 10]. Instagram and YouTube are the top social 
media platforms being used by half of U.S. teens ages 
13 to 17 [10]. The aim is to create a robust training 
dataset using the teen social media data. Then to 
establish ground truth labels on riskiness of social 
media utilizing the previous qualitative data  coding.  In 
this study first we have them fill an online survey about 
their social media use, online risk experience, and their 
mental health. Then we ask them to upload their 
Instagram data on our website. Then we show them 
their conversations on Instagram and ask them to 
choose messages that made them feel uncomfortable 
or unsafe. We designed these surveys so we can have a 
ground truth of what teens think it is risky and 
associate that with their real social media data. 
Research Status 
My first research study for my dissertation have been 
accepted to the ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems 2020. For the second study I am 
planning to create the training dataset by summer 
2020 from Perverted Justice dataset and apply machine 
learning algorithm. For the third study we have 
developed a website for the surveys and the Instagram 
data collection which we lunch on Spring 2020. I will 
Doctoral Consortiumcreate a training dataset by Fall 2020 and develop 
accurate machine learning sexual risk detection 
algorithm s by Spring 2020.  
Expected Contributions  and Doctoral 
Colloquium at GROUP 2020  
The novel contribution of this thesis is to leverage 
machine learning techniques and human -centered 
approaches for the design and development of tools 
that address the problem of adolescent  exposure to 
online sexual risks.  I will use  a deeper contextual 
understanding of teen social media  users by leveraging 
human insight s to develop online sexual risk detection 
algorithm s tailored to adolescent s. I expect that my 
approach will be more helpful  for teens and their 
parents.  It would be valuable for me to get f eedback on 
how to strengthen my dissertation from perspective of 
ideas and methods for tackling the problem . Attending 
the DC at GROUP would be beneficial for me in terms of 
learning more methodologies and practices from 
stablished researchers in SIGCHI co mmunity.  
Acknowledgement  
This research is supported by the U.S. National Science 
Foundation under grant number #IIP -1827700  and by 
the William T. Grant Foundation under grant number 
#187941 . Any opinion, findings, and conclusions or 
recommendations expressed in this material are those 
of the authors and do not necessaril y reflect the views 
of the research sponsors.  
References  
1.Y. Cheong, A. K. Jensen, E. R. Guðnadóttir, B. Bae,
and J. Togelius. 2015. Detecting Predatory Behavior
in Game Chats. IEEE Transactions on Computational
Intelligence and AI in Games  7, 3: 220 –232.2.Mohammadreza Ebrahimi, Ching Y. Suen, and Olga
Ormandjieva. 2016. Detecting predatory
conversations in social media by deep Convolutional
Neural Networks. Digital Investigatio n 18: 33 –49.
3.Arup Kumar Ghosh, Karla Badillo -Urquiola, Shion
Guha, Joseph J. LaViola Jr, and Pamela J.
Wisniewski. 2018. Safety vs. Surveillance: What
Children Have to Say about Mobile Apps for Parental
Control. Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems  - CHI ’18 ,
ACM Press, 1 –14.
4.Juliane A. Kloess, Anthony R. Beech, and Leigh
Harkins. 2014. Online child sexual exploitation:
prevalence, process, and offender characteristics.
Trauma, Violence & Abuse  15, 2: 126 –139.
5.Carlos Laorden, Patxi Galán -García, Igor Santos,
Borja Sanz, Jose Gomez Hidalgo, and Pablo Bringas.
2013. Negobot: A Conversational Agent Based on
Game Theory for the Detection of Paedophile
Behaviour. In Advances in Intelligent Systems and
Computing . 261–270.
6.Sonia Livingstone and Peter K. Smith. 2014. Annual
Research Review: Harms experienced by child users
of online and mobile technologies: the nature,
prevalence and management of sexual and
aggressive risks in the digital age. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry  55, 6: 635 –654.
7.Kimberly Mitchell, Lisa Jones, David Finkelhor, and
Janis Wolak. 2014. Trends in Unwanted Online
Experiences and Sexting : Final Report. Crimes
Against Children Research Center .
160
GROUP '20 Companion, January 6–8, 2020, Sanibel Island, FL, USA
Doctoral Consortium8.Anthony T. Pinter, Pamela J. Wisn iewski, Heng Xu,
Mary Beth Rosson, and Jack M. Caroll. 2017.
Adolescent Online Safety: Moving Beyond Formative
Evaluations to Designing Solutions for the Future.
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction
Design and Children , ACM, 352 –357.
9.Mattia s Rost, Louise Barkhuus, Henriette Cramer,
and Barry Brown. 2013. Representation and
communication: challenges in interpreting large
social media datasets. 6.
10. 2018. Teens, Social Media & Technology 2018 |
Pew Research Center. Retrieved September 22,2018 from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2018/05/31/teens -
social -media -technology -2018/.  
11. Perverted -Justice.com - The largest and best
anti-predator organization online. Retrieved October
28, 2019 from http://www.perverted -justice.com/.
12. PAN at CLEF 2012 - Author Identification.
Retrieved November 1, 2019 from
https://pan.webis.de/clef12/pan12 -web/author -
identification.html.
161
GROUP '20 Companion, January 6–8, 2020, Sanibel Island, FL, USA
Doctoral Consortium